"So Bhagavad Gita Prabhupada explains just like in a sandwich, the stuff is in between. In a similar fashion, the beginning six chapters yes, it is a fact. Always Krishna is presenting Bhakti Yoga but directly it is not presented. Some hints are given. So a person who is wise, who is a devotee he will understand what Krishna is pointing towards. But otherwise first six chapters. Krishna mainly explains karma yoga. Last six chapters Ghana Yoga. And in between seven to twelve the most important knowledge is explained. And of all these chapters, this chapter nine is very very important. The most confidential. Confidential means secret. The entire knowledge of Bhagavad Gita is secret. Why it is secret? Because you can search through all of the books, you can surf through all the websites on the internet but we will never be able to figure out this thing. And what is that? That we are not the body. In a dream. A person is calculating, working very hard, planning everything, trying to mitigate the cause of his distress without realizing that it is dream. So it is very confidential. In a similar fashion now how much ever we miss search mundane material knowledge a person can never figure out. It is a great secret that I am not the body itself. So this is called confidential knowledge which is described in second chapter and third chapter I am not the body. The fundamental knowledge Krishna is giving so simply if a person understands this knowledge that I am not the body, it's a great relief. It's freedom from all the anxiety. Brahma Bhuta Prasannathma, Nashvocatina Kangshati a person becomes very very happy if he is able to realize this knowledge. And higher than that knowledge is explained in the chapter 7th and 8th. And that is a knowledge of devotional service that is more confidential. Even though a person can understand I am not the body, but then who am I? From where have I come? What am I supposed to do? This knowledge is not revealed. So knowledge about Krishna, about devotional service is given in 7th and 8th. And there is one knowledge which is most confidential which is higher than more confidential also and that is the knowledge of unalloyed pure devotional service of Krishna. Many people may take to devotional service and they take to devotional service for particular reason. Krishna told in Bhagavad Gita he explained Chaturveda Bhajante, Maam, Jana, Sukritinu, Arjuna four kinds of people they take shelter of mine and which are these four kinds. So there are unalloyed devotees apart from them, these four category of people, they surrender to Krishna. Bhartarshabha Art, the person who is in distress, he takes to Krishna consciousness to get relief. Artharti, who is having some demand in his life for fulfillment of those demands he takes to Krishna consciousness. Jaiyasu is simply inquisitive. He takes to Krishna consciousness. Gyani, who is searching after absolute truth, he also takes to Krishna consciousness. But all of these people have some motive. Either I want something for myself mitigation of my distress or fulfillment of my material desires or I want knowledge. I am jiggyasu. This thing is impressive. Let me try to understand. Or I am seeking knowledge of absolute truth. But all these people have certain motive. So when a person is able to attain a stage where he wants to serve Krishna without any motive that is called pure devotional service. And unless a person comes to this platform of pure devotional service he will not be able to attain the perfection of human form of life. He will not be able to attain that spiritual bliss for which we are always hankering. So why we are there in this bodily concept of life? What is creating this confusion? Hallucination. We all understand hallucination when we are under the influence of drugs. So the festivals we are supposed to remind us of Lord his message they have become avenues for creating more hallucination. So this festival holy was there so so many people they would take so many intoxicants and then they would perceive different things. My roof has gone has been blown apart. My car's color has changed or something is happening. My chair is flying in the sky. Different hallucinations they create. Similarly when we dream we have different hallucination. And I create my own world. Although that is not reality. So this is the nature of mind. Mind is always ready to put you under hallucinations. Because it is controlled by external energy. Material energy. So as soon as there is Rajas and Thamas in the form of sleep or intoxication then this hallucination arises. So that is why why should we depend upon mind to find truth? And why should we get anxious if I'm not able to understand God immediately. So Prabhupada has patience. You have understood little. You will understand more gradually. So if you lose patience then also we will lose our spiritual life. So we have to have patience. I will understand. So far I have understood so much. Now as I do more service I will understand God all the more. So we should not very much worry about what I'm perceiving or what I am understanding. We see our understanding is so faulty. Under the influence of intoxicant sleep Rajasthamas we get confused. We hallucinate. So just like the material energy puts us into hallucination when we become lusty a person commits crime or in anger. And so many news we hear that wife killed the husband or husband killed the wife. And after that they also committed suicide. They realize what I have done this mistake. So it's a mistake. But that time in a fit of rage under Rajaguna they became mad. So this Rajaguna tamagona lust, anger, greed. In a greed a person keeps on committing so many other things. He limits later. So lust, anger, greed these are the gateways to hell. And our civilization trains us. He has become more and more greedy work very hard. When we tell people do not work hard. Sometimes people stop listening to our sessions oh, what is this, what are they telling? So the civilization is so trained, they don't have common sense. Ultimately what is this hard work? I teach everyone we have moral science, do not become greedy. But what I'm working hard for, it is just for greed. Needs are anyway satisfied. Krishna has arranged enough for everybody. But just out of our greed we are creating this civilization of immense hard work. And then a person is not able to understand with sanity what is truth. So lust, anger and greed, they madden a person. So that is why we need to take shelter of another energy which is called spiritual energy. We are influenced by some energy which creates hallucination. Another energy will take us out of hallucination. Just like when a person is unconscious, then you put another energy that is water. Water not just purifies your body, water purifies your mind. Also water. If it is thrown on the face, a person wakes up. And there are so many other methods. If a person is bitten by snake, so it is told some people who are expert mantra chanters by chanting proper mantras that effect of the poison can be nullified. This is also a science. So just like a person who is bitten by snake, his poison can be nullified by proper mantras. In a similar fashion situation of all of us, conditioned living entity here is just like that. We are bitten by the snake of Maya illusion and we are creating artificial understanding. I am a person, I am an animal, man, woman, belong to some country. Something is my objective, some temporary realities. So we will come out of it again by mantra. And that mantra is the holy name of Krishna. So that science by which we can properly take shelter of internal energy of Krishna by which we are able to come out of this illusory energy that process is called pure devotional service. No other thing can establish a person on platform of absolute truth. So thus it is very great secret. First of all, understanding that I am not the body itself is so difficult. And this a person can understand also. If he is very satvic, it may take long time, but he can understand I am not the body. But without taking shelter of a pure devotee, bona fide spiritual master, nobody can understand this knowledge which is considered most confidential. And that is what is described now in this chapter. Nine chapter of Bhagavad Gita pure devotional service. So let us now see the first verse. First two verses we'll be covering today of this nine chapter. So here is a yeah first verse shibhagawanuvacha idam tutamam pravakshamiyanasuya ganambiyana sahitam yachvamoksha Seshubhat. Translation the Supreme Lord said my dear Arjuna, because you are never envious of me, I shall impart to you this most secret wisdom knowing which you shall be relieved of the miseries of material existence. So here many many important words are being used in this loca. So this is the chapter we had started with before the lockdown or just after lockdown. So again we have come back to it. So this chapter will be covering quickly because all the lectures are available in podcasts. So you can hear that. But still some special topics which we could not cover or could not cover with focus at that time, we'll be covering now. So for detailed explanation understanding you can refer again to the podcast. They are there on the platforms spotify, Podbean, Apple, Amazon and few important things that we'll be explaining. So here Krishna is explaining idam Tutte Guhyatam Gohyatam goyatam means most confidential pravakshyami Anasuya Veganam Viyana Sahitam so here Krishna is telling I will explain you ghyanam means knowledge and Vijnan means realize knowledge. Having theoretical knowledge is one thing. We can say I am not the body but Vigyan. Realizing that thing, it is not easy. So here Krishna is explaining in this chapter gyanam Vijnana SAITAM knowledge and the realized knowledge yaj Gyatva Mokshase Ashubhad knowing which you shall be relieved of all the miseries of material existence. So this knowledge is so important. If you are able to have access to this knowledge of this chapter then we can get relief from all the miseries of the material existence. So miseries of material existence cannot be solved by developing any medicine, cannot be solved by improving our birth, cannot be solved by any other means. It can be solved by hearing this message. Krishna is telling so God is giving remedy just hear this message what I presented in this chapter and if you are able to assimilate then you get freedom from all the miseries. Oh it is so nice. I'm having so many problems in my life. Simply if I understand this knowledge I'll be relieved. The answer is yes. God is telling. So Srila Prabhupada explains as a devotee hears more and more about the Supreme Lord he becomes enlightened. Enlightened means he gets knowledge. This hearing process is recommended in the Shrimad Bhagavatam. The messages of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are full of potencies and these potencies can be realized if topics regarding the Supreme Godhead are discussed amongst devotees. This cannot be achieved by the association of mental speculators or academic scholars for it is realized knowledge. So here very important point is being mentioned. So of so many processes to understand the vedas recommend we have been seeing in Bhagavad Gita also so many processes Krishna has described so many kinds of Yajna Krishna has described and Parishit Maharaj also was having this difficulty. So many processes but then time is very less, only seven days are there. So what to do, which process to apply in our life? So thus Prabhupada is mentioning in the purport in the beginning itself that what is a process recommended for this age, this Srimad Bhagavatam purana has arisen recently so that people in the Kaliyuga who are completely blinded by ignorance, they can get light. So first of all it is mentioned Srimad Bhagavatam has all the knowledge for the people of Kalyuga recently it has been composed by Maharshi Yasudev. And what is Srimad Bhagavatam recommending? Prabhupada is explaining this hearing process is recommended in Srimad Bhagavatam. As a devotee hears more and more about the Supreme Lord he becomes enlightened. So parishit Maharaj was recommended this simple process you simply sit down and keep on hearing the pastimes of Supreme Personality of Godhead and parishit Maharaj he made his life successful. So Srimad Bhagavatam explains so the basics are given here that pure devotional service is to be executed. And what is this pure devotional service that Srimad Bhagavatam elaborates so it can be accomplished in nine ways. And that is shravanam Kirtanam Vishnu Hosman Pada sevanam Archanam mandanam Dasyam Sakhyamatmanivedanam. This answer was given by this is what we are supposed to do on holy rather than taking some intoxicants so Hiranda Kashyapu the greatest atheist of the universe, most powerful scientist and Yogi Hiran Kashyapu. When he asked his prahlad Maharaj who was his successor, he wanted him to have the best education, best politics, diplomacy he should learn. Then he was sent to school to learn it from the disciples of Shukra, Chara, Shand and AMark. And when the small child came back in vacations so he is asking his child please tell me what have you learned in the school? So Prahlad Maharashtras the best thing which I have learned is Shavanam Kiritanam Vishnu Hosmanam Pada Savannah Hitvatmapatam Griyamandu Kupam Vanam Gato Yadhari Mashrayata so Prahad Maharaj is telling what I have learned is my dear father hitvatmapatam Griyamandu Kupam so this household life you have taken a vow to stay in this hitva. You please leave it immediately. Andhukupam because this life is like a dark will so just like a person falls in the dark well, he may. Keep on crying nobody would hear in a similar fashion what life you have made for yourself. This household it is like a dark well hitva you please leave it immediately it is Atma Patam it is suicide what you are committing griyam andhu Kupam vanam Gato yadharim Ashrayata Vanam Gato you go to the jungle immediately and what should you do in jungle? You can do some tapasya XYZ Pralad Maharaj is telling no Harim Ashrayata take shelter of Hari so why go to jungle? Because it facilitates. So go to jungle and take shelter of Hari. So Hiran Kashipu became very angry. Of course, this household life is about the materialists. A person who is a devotee, advanced devotee. If he follows the rules and regulations of grahast Ashram very nicely, he also can maintain the consciousness of Asanyasi So, a materialist who is not a devotee. For him, household life is like a dark well. If a person falls, there is no chance of rescue. So Prahlad Maharaj told this is what I have learned. So he became very angry that what nonsense you are teaching to my child. So they are telling no, we have not taught him. Somehow he has learned all these things. Maybe Devtas are coming and teaching and we'll be careful next time. So next time when he comes back again, he tells this loka, what have you learned? So Parallaad Maharaj tells what I have learned. My father is Shravanam Kiritanam vishnu archanam mandanam dasyam Sakshamatmanam. ITI pun Sarpita vishnu Bhakti Navalakshana Tanman Aditam Uttamam of all the education, the best education is if a person follows Shravanam, he hears about the supreme Lord Kiritanam. He chants about the supreme Lord Shravanam Kiritanam Vishnu very clearly he has explained Shavanam Kiritanam not about any other devi, Devata or mundane affair. Shravanam Kiritanam about Vishnu Smaranam and then thinking of him pada sevanam serving his lotus feet Archanam the deity worship Vandanam offering prayers to the Lord dasyam carrying out his orders sakhyam, having friendship with the Lord and Atmanivedanam offering everything, all your possessions, including your mind, body, everything completely in the service of the Lord. ITI Pun Sarpita Vishnu bhaktis Chain Navalakshana so a person who engages himself in devotional service in either of these nine methods, unto whom ITI Pun Sarpita Vishnu again he is mentioning to Vishnu, not for anybody else. So Prahlad Maharaj explained, this is what I have learned in the school. So this is called pure devotional service. Shravanam Kirtanam, Vishnu HOS, Maradam, Pada sevanam so before this, Krishna has explained yat Karoshi, Yat Joshi all these things, whatever you are doing, whatever you're offering, you please offer it to me. So this is also not pure devotional service. Because a person is not completely surrendering to Krishna. Krishna, I understand you are God, but I want to do some kind of activity. So Krishna tells okay, no problem. Whatever you are doing, whatever work you want to do, offer the result of that work to me. Krishna, I want to eat this thing does not matter. You take that food, Satvic food, but please offer it to me. So a person maintains his choice but offers the result to Krishna. So this is called karma yoga. The culmination of Karma Yoga. Bhakti yoga means complete surrender. So this is how Bhakti Yoga is practiced. The most confidential knowledge Shavanam Kiritanam, Vishnu Hosmanam, Pada sevanam, Archanam mandanam Dasyam Sakhyam Atmanama but here also in this most confidential knowledge, the very important understanding is which is explained by the Acharyas which is explained everywhere. Here also Srila Prabhupada explains that this hearing process is the foundation of all the other things that you may do. So a person can be very nicely engaged in any of the other processes. He may try to think about Lord, he may try to engage in deity worship, he may try to offer prayers for XYZ. But if the hearing is not proper then the devotional service will not become perfect. Hearing is foundation of all the processes. So definitely Krishna is explaining this in this 9th chapter. This knowledge by which all the miseries we can be relieved of. But then how to get in touch with the spiritual potency which is there in these chapters? So Krishna has explained in Bhagavatam which Prabhupada has translated here. Satam prasangat. Mamaviriya Samvido. Mamaviriya Samvido. The messages of Supreme Personality of Godhead are full of potencies. So just like we are hallucinating because of material potency, by spiritual potency we can come out of hallucination. And where do we find such spiritual energy? Spiritual potency? In the messages about God which are recorded in these scriptures. So messages of Supreme Personality of Godhead are full of potencies. And these potencies can be realized if topics regarding the Supreme Godhead are discussed among devotees. So discussion among the devotees is very very important. This cannot be achieved by the association of mental speculators or academic scholars. For it is realized knowledge. Satam Prasangat, Mamavira Samido, Bhavanti, Rita, Karna, Rasayana, Katha in the association of devotees Hrith and Karn the message of the Supreme Personality of Goddess which is full of potencies. These potencies are realized only when these topics are discussed in the association of devotees. So that is why Srimad, Bhagavatam, Bhagavad, Gita are not the scriptures which we can read on our own. And we'll expect that I can attain perfection. That is not possible. Yes. To begin with, by touching the scripture we make advancement. That is a fact. By reading we will realize something Prabhupada explains. But advancement will not happen. Real potencies will not be revealed unless it is discussed amongst the devotees. The devotees are constantly engaged in the Supreme Lord service. The Lord understands the mentality and sincerity of a particular living entity who is engaged in Krishna consciousness and gives him the intelligence to understand the science of Krishna in the association of devotees. So again it is being mentioned that devotees are constantly engaged in service of Supreme Lord. That is fine. And the Lord understands the mentality and sincerity. So this is also important. So Krishna is seeing our sincerity. Only if a person is sincere, Krishna will give proper guidance from the heart. So we cannot cheat Krishna. So for our spiritual advancement we have to examine ourselves how much sincere we are in our quest for spiritual knowledge. So one who is engaged in Krishna consciousness and gives him intelligence to understand the science of Krishna in the association of devotees so Krishna gives him the intelligence. How to understand? In the association of devotees, discussion of Krishna is very potent. And if a fortunate person has such association, again it is being mentioned such association discussion of Krishna. Just see how it is mentioned. Discussion association discussion association discussion of Krishna is very potent. And if a fortunate person has such association and tries to assimilate the knowledge then he will surely make advancement towards spiritual realization. Lord Krishna in order to encourage Arjuna to higher and higher elevation in his potent service describes in this nine chapter matters more confidential than any he has already disclosed. So this is the first secret for spiritual growth. So many times devotees or devotees have some hint others have no hint at all. They try various things as we are discussing in previous sessions. Somebody is trying to see light in meditation. Somebody is trying to just fast very very rigorously. They think by rigorous tapasia some people do very rigorous tapasia. They would just eat what falls in their palmful and they would deliberately make their food very bitter. They don't want to have any good taste of food. Some people will live just in the mountains you see in Kumbhumala they will descend Nagas. It is so cold over there. But they have practiced by so much tapasya that it doesn't hurt them. Such pinching cold we can even healthy person will become unfit in such circumstances with full clothing. But they are living there clotheless. So people are taking such rigorous austerity in icecade mountains for hundreds of years. They are meditating. And like this various methods people try but they don't realize this very important process especially which is potent in Kalyuga which has always been potent but it has been made very very easy in Kalyuga. And that secret is hearing. Hearing in the association of devotees and hearing process it AIDS both ends. If a person wants to fall into material life that process also starts with hearing. And if he wants liberation that also begins with hearing. How a person entangles himself in the material world he hears. He hears oh drinking is very nice. This kind of wine is very good. And he develops desire. Oh my seniors were drinking, let me also drink. Then he hears oh this movie is very nice, let me watch this movie. And then he goes to the movie hears in the movie or this kind of relationship is very nice. Boy and girl if they are together there is unlimited ecstasy. So he hears and by hearing he develops that desire or let me also have this thing. And then he gets entangled like that in the material world he hears when advertisement is there or this restaurant has opened it is offering this thing and then he wishes to have or this nice dish is there introduced in the country. This nice car is launched. He hears about it oh I want to purchase that car. So in this way by hearing a person entangles himself in the material life creates so many desires. He hankers for those desires. Takes so much of anxiety, does so much of hard work when will I fulfill my desire? And most of the times he is not able to attain the desire. So he is very much dissatisfied. He becomes angry, he becomes frustrated. Oh my desire is not fulfilled and if the desire is fulfilled, then what happens? Then there is fear. I have to maintain it. Now I have got so much name, fame, money. I become a famous student. I have to maintain my rank. Oh, I am performing very nicely every quarter in the company. I have to continue my performance. I have been a scholar throughout. I have to show to the world that I am still a scholar. I am a capable man. In this way he works very very hard. So there is fear. Oh, somebody may not take away my property, my balance, my spouse and people are in constant fear. My company. So constant fear is there once you start possessing name, fame and objects. So in this way a person creates unlimited problems. First rigorous hard work and anxiety. Then after that there is fear. And then ultimately there is time creates separation. That is a fact. Nobody can remain here eternally. So a person who is wise who understands the temporary nature of work, temporary nature of this material world he does not create any strong association with anybody or anything here. Because what is the need of investing so much of your love, energy, time in a place where separation is inevitable? So rather invest all these things in Krishna who is eternal. You are eternal. Krishna is eternal. So this is called sanity. So if a person invests all his time, money, everything in some external dresses only and then dresses will vanish. The property, name, fame, everything will vanish. And when the time separates either while we are living or at the time of death it creates tremendous pain in the heart of person. That is called lamentation. So in this way material life is completely full of miseries in every stage. Whether person is in the stage of realizing his desired object, attaining his desired object, whether he has attained and definitely after separation once he or she has lost it. This is the way of material life. But how it starts from hearing a person hears oh, this is very nice. This kind of objective should be accomplished by shabda. Material world begins. So technically also the vedas explain very beautifully this earth, air, water, fire, sky, mind, intelligence, everything. So from all how everything begins, it begins with Shabda and how the liberation happens vedanta Sutra mentions the entire Vedas are summarized in sutra formula. The Vedanta sutra explains ana vritti shabdat. This is I think the last of the sutra. That is why most important ana vriti Shabdat the liberation happens by sound. So very clearly Vedanta Sutra is mentioned. So the process which we are following hearing Bhagavatam, hearing the name of Krishna it is very very authorized. It is the Vedanta aphorism anavriti Shabdat the liberation anavriti liberation happens by shabda by sound hearing the sound. So thus let me share few important items with you which Prabhupada also explains about hearing. So in Srimad Bhagavatam it is mentioned when the hearing process is perfect and complete, the other processes become automatically perfect in their own way. So sometimes we may get lost in some other processes. Just like worshipping Krishna, many of us might be having Ladogopal or Radhakrishna deities in our country. It is a common phenomena. But if hearing is not there, it simply remains a ritual even after a very very long time. There would be no perfection. A person could have got Bhagavad Gita, he could have memorized everything nicely. But if in association of devotees he does not hear, then again he does not attain perfection. So this hearing process bring perfection. If when the hearing process is perfect and complete, the other processes become automatically perfect in their own way. There are different transcendental activities of the Lord and each and every one of them is competent to bestow the desired result. Provided the hearing process is perfect. 1.8.36. Bhagwatam o learned Brahmanas when Shugdhya Goswami recited Bhagavatam there in the presence of Emperor Parikshit I heard him with rapt attention. The suta Goswami is explaining and thus by his mercy I learned Bhagavatam from that great and powerful sage. Now I shall try to make you hear the same thing, the very same thing as I learned it from Him. And as I have realized it, so it is being explained. Simple hearing is not all. So a word which is used here is susamahita with wrapped attention. Simple hearing is not all. So first of all we understood hearing is very important as the foundation of everything. But simple hearing is not all. One must realize the text with proper attention. So attentive hearing is very important. The word Niveshta means that Goswami drank the juice of Bhagavatam through his ears. That is the real process of receiving Bhagavatam. One should hear with rapt attention from the real person. And then he can at once realize the presence of Lord Krishna. In every page the secret of knowing Bhagavatam is mentioned here. So what we are discussing is but Bhagavatam only. Even in Bhagavad Gita classes the potencies qualities name pastimes of Supreme Lord and his devotees. So this Bhagavatam, how we can realize it is mentioned here. Niveshta not simple hearing is not all. One must realize a text with proper attention. So attentive hearing is very important. So first of all we understood hearing in the association of devotees and then hearing with proper attention, with wrapped attention. Now this very important excerpt about hearing I often share. So we should always keep in mind. Prabhupada is also quoting it from his spiritual master bhaktis Dhanmaraj. It is from the very same book we refer many times nectar of instruction purpose to text number eight. So how everything? The most advanced platform of spiritual realization. Not just seeing that spirit soul is energy but understanding what is the form, what is my form, what is my identity? I have forgotten now thinking I am this dress of this material. World how that form would be revealed. Not just I will be able to see myself different from the body. I will realize what is my identity, what is my unique relation with Krishna. So here it is being explained. In the neophyte stage one should always engage in hearing Krishna Katha. This is called Shravanadasha, the stage of hearing. By constantly hearing the transcendental holy name of Krishna and hearing of his transcendental form, qualities and pastimes one can attain to the stage of acceptance called Varanadasha. So acceptance is not easy because we have not been exposed to this education very properly. You bring something new. It is difficult for people to accept and digest. So in the neophyte stage one should always engage. How to reach the stage of acceptance automatically. When the lower modes are washed away, we will come. We will understand everything. So here it is being explained. Don't puzzle your mind so much. In the neophyte stage one should always engage in hearing Krishna Katha. This is called shravanadasha. This is a platform where a person should always keep on hearing. Hearing by constantly hearing the transcendental holy name. So hear the name of Krishna. Either we personally chant and hear or somebody other is chanting and we are hearing in any of the way. Hearing the holy name of Krishna and hearing of his transcendental, form, qualities, pastimes means, activities one can attain to the stage of acceptance called Varanadasha. The science of Krishna will be understood in this way. And then a person will accept whatever is being mentioned. When one attains this stage, he becomes attached to the hearing of Krishna Katha. So every line is full of potency. So in the initial stages Prabhupada tells when you read these books sometimes it may be difficult to put faith on few things and confusion and doubts will be there. So how to come out of those doubts? Should I apply my mind? Apply my logic? Go to the best logician. Take his help in understanding what is written in these books. No. The scientific process is mentioned here. And that process is Shamana dasha. One should always engage in hearing constantly hearing morning to evening by as many means as possible. Either by playing on your phone or by chanting or by kirtan or by any ways and means. A person should always constantly keep on hearing as much as possible throughout the day. And by this you will be able to accept whatever is mentioned in the vedas. Entire clarity will come. It is not blind faith, it will be rational faith. The science would be revealed by this process. Because this is a seva of Krishna. As we read in the Purport. By seeing the mentality sincerity of the disciple, Krishna reveals himself his knowledge in the association with devotees. So by this seva rendering your wrapped attention Krishna reveals and the person is able to accept when the science logics are revealed. So the system is not to get puzzled and apply your intense logic and attend some workshops for improving your reading no, simply as much as possible throughout the day keep on hearing hearing hearing name form pastimes activities of Krishna so when one attains this stage which stage? Varanadasha. He becomes attached to the hearing of Krishna Katha. Then attachment will develop. Just like now. We might be attached to some movies, some novels, some other fiction, stories. Person becomes attached to hearing of Krishna Katha. When one is able to chant in ecstasy and then when you chant, there is ecstasy. You love to chant. There is. Just like when we put some sweet on the tongue immediately we like oh, it is so nice. Let me put more in a similar fashion. It would be like honey. A person would be able to chant in ecstasy. He attains the stage of smarana vasta the stage of remembering. So remembering Krishna is what we are supposed to do. We learned in 7th chapter and eight chapter tasma survey Shukaleshu Mahmanasmariuddhya although Krishna is present on the chariot with Arjuna Prabhupada explains Krishna is there in the background. Krishna has arranged the war. Krishna is present with Arjuna on the chariot still Krishna is telling Arjuna to think of him. So this is called Samadhi when a person is always thinking of Krishna within his heart because the modes of nature, this is the science they influence us through our heart. This is the seat of all energies the heart. That is why the heart stops beating at death. So in the heart when Krishna is situated then a person is not influenced by the material energy. So placing Krishna in the heart is very very important. So yogis do it by sitting there and in the jungle so that they are not distracted at all. Devotee does not get distracted because he has immense attraction and love for Krishna. A soldier is fighting the war but he's thinking of his family members because of attachment in a situation like war just like a soldier is able to think of family members and before death he sees their pictures and dies leaves the body that is what a devotee is supposed to do very same thing. Tasma surveyshu Kaleshu therefore at all times Arjuna Ma manusmar think of me yudhycha fight at the same time. But this is not easy fighting and thinking of Krishna so that is why the process is recommended here. Always keep on hearing about Krishna then we'll accept everything whatever is mentioned. Then after that we will become attached to hearing of Krishna katha and then when we chant there would be ecstasy in chanting and when we are able to chant ecstatically then smarana will happen. Then remembrance will come the stage of remembering. This is the next stage smarana Vastha recollection, absorption, meditation, constant remembrance of Krishna constant remembrance and trance are the five items of progressive Krishna smarana. Now this stage of remembrance is having various stages further. First is recollection means sometimes you are able to think of Krishna. Then absorption. A person is absorbed in the thought of Krishna. Then meditation absorption is very deep and then constant remembrance and then trance. A person is completely oblivious of what is happening. On the material sphere are the five items of progressive Krishna smaran. At first the remembrance of Krishna may be interrupted at intervals. Sometimes you will be able to think of Krishna. Form of Krishna may be awakened, but it would be interrupted. We may forget also when remembrance is uninterrupted, always a person is able to remember. It becomes concentrated and it is called meditation. We all know what is the difference between remembering something and meditating. Meditation means concentrated thinking without any interruption. When meditation expands and becomes constant now there is no just faint and little remembrance. There is deep absorption. Meditation has expanded and meditation has become constant. It is called Anusmriti. So there are technical terms for all these technical stages of progressive consciousness. By uninterrupted and unseasing Anusmriti one enters the stage of Samadhi or spiritual trance. After Marant Dasa or Samadhi has fully developed, the soul comes to understand his original constitutional position. At that time he can perfectly and clearly understand his eternal relationship with Krishna. That is called Sampati dasha, the perfection of life. So thus we should not take this hearing process very lightly. It is most powerful process and it begins with constant hearing in the association of devotees with attention. So by following this process these progressive stages do come. And thus there is another practical pastime about it which I've explained before also. Prabhupada was on the Vyasasan about to lecture and there was a group of ten or twelve devotees sitting near him. One devotee is explaining I was sitting under a corner of the Vyasasan. Vyasasan means the big seat, royal seat on the spiritual master. He's offered to be seated. So he was sitting under a corner of the vyasasan and there was a group of ten to twelve devotees sitting near him. Prabhupada was about to start his lecture. Hans, Duta and Yashodanandan were also there, two disciples of Prabhupada. When Prabhupada started to speak in Hindi, a whole bunch of devotees got up to leave because disciples were not able to figure out Hindi. So they thought oh, it's a Hindi lecture. So all of them, they got up and they started to leave. Prabhupada stopped speaking. He looked at us and said in English this is for you as well. Where are you going? Stop. You should all stay here and listen. The devotees thought that they could walk away from Prabhupada's lecture since they didn't understand the language. But Prabhupada didn't like that at all. He wanted everybody to sit and listen because whether we understood it or not, it was purifying for us. Afterwards he said quotes you devotees don't understand the potency of this preaching. It is what is going to purify your hearts. You will become Krishna conscious by hearing. Even if you don't understand not by wandering around unquote. So thus see what is the importance of hearing. Even though the Krishna katha if it is received from a pure devotee it could be in another language still we are supposed to hear that. That is why Prabhupada was telling even the young children should be brought to Bhagavatam class. Even though the children were sometimes disturbing and because it is a meditation Prabhupada is completely absorbed in thoughts of Krishna and thus explaining about Krishna. So sometimes when the child would disturb a lot Prabhupada would tell the child to be taken outside. But Prabhupada told if the mothers can keep the child satisfied silent then please bring the children also what a child can understand who is sucking breast. But still such a child also was requested to sit in the Bhagavatam class. So this is the potency of hearing Krishna katha. So we should all realize this very important element. So few things again I would repeat. Please note it down. Please keep it in your mind. First thing is hearing Bhagavatam is the solution of all the miseries of life. And how shall we realize the potency when it is heard in the assembly of devotees. Association of devotees discussion of topics of Krishna in the association of devotees. And it is important not just hearing but hearing with wrapped attention is very important. If we don't give wrapped attention to be inattentive while chanting all the offenses they begin from this inattention and the chanting offensive chanting if we are not careful of removing the offenses will give rise to material desires in our heart. And then we would wonder that what is this happening I am chanting and so many material desires are there or new desires are coming in my heart. Because we are not careful of removing the offenses. So the same chanting hearing process will give rise to weeds in the heart. Material desires will come and eventually they choke up the Bhakti. So it is very important that we do attentive chanting and Bhakti vanod Thakur explains that simply if a person does attentive chanting then very soon he gets the taste of chanting the Holy name of Krishna. It is so nice. Even though we can be very offensive simply constant chanting attentive chanting it will bring all the result. Chanting will become very very pleasant to do so mind may rebel. Something will happen. But we should not succumb to the desires of mind but persist with our efforts. We have to have patience immediately. Mind may not come under control. It's a tough journey. But nevertheless we have to understand that we have to as far as possible krishna sees our endeavor because of past conditioning. Despite our past conditioning we are attempting that will satisfy Krishna. But if we don't attempt we don't try at all then that offends Krishna. This devotee is not trying to be attentive at all. So from our sides we should put rigorous effort so this is one thing hearing another very important thing Prabhupada mentions and where is that thing? Yeah. Then Prabhupada explains in text number two rajividya Rajaguhiyam pavitramidamutamam pratyaksha vagamam Dharmyam susukam Kartumavyayam this knowledge is the king of education. Raj Vidya so much education we have. First education that we are having now is to maintain body and soul together. Because that is also important. If the body and soul is not together, how can we make any advancement? Only in this human body we can make spiritual life perfect so that is why this knowledge is also required but today's education system finishes everything just by keeping body and soul together so that is why this is not perfect knowledge. So this knowledge is called Raj Vidya of pure devotional service. It is a king. Finally. Knowledge after knowledge after knowledge. Knowledge culminates here in pure devotional service. Raj Vidya, raj Guhiyam the most secret of all secrets, it is the purest knowledge pavitramidamutamam. And because it gives direct perception of the self by realization, it is the perfection of religion. It is everlasting and it is joyfully performed. So other processes could be very, very painful. Who likes to sit there on the Himalayan tops in that pinching cold? Who likes to sit surrounded by fire in the summers? Who likes to give a food and so many other austerities tapasya these processes are very very painful however this process pure devotional service just see this is the recommendation of Bhagavad Gita where does Bhagavad Gita tell you? Perform hatha yoga. You perform this thing and do all kinds of unnecessary austerity give trouble to your body? Yes, basic austerities are required. But Bhagavad Gita is explaining sukham this process is very pleasant to perform. Shaunam Kiritanam Vishnu singing dancing in front of Krishna it is so nice meditating upon Krishna hearing his name mind becomes so peaceful even if you don't understand about Krishna at all honoring Prasadam of Krishna eating nice foodstuffs it is so nice. So what is the difficulty reading Bhagavad Gita Bhagavatam so nice stories, philosophy everything is so enlivening so susukam kartumavyam everything is just full of pleasure. So this is the process which is recommended raj Vidya the topmost knowledge the best spiritual process which Krishna has described in this chapter it is susukham it is very very pleasant to perform from day one although if we are very very highly conditioned some trouble can be there. Initially a person will not be able to relish much of it but nevertheless, very soon the taste develops. Susukam Kartum avyayam at least prasadam we all can relish always and dancing everybody can relish and it is being mentioned here susukamkar pratyaksha avagamam dharmyam pratyaksha avagamam means it is not just theory. People tell that oh, what if this thing is there? What if that thing is there? No pratyakshmi is evident we will be able to perceive it we will be able to feel spiritual progress. But then we have a question that why don't we feel? Here in Bhagavad Gita it is mentioned that pure devotional service Shavanam Kiritana, Vishnu we are doing that will give Pratyaksha Avagamam Dharmyam it will give direct experience of truth. Then why we are not experiencing? So the answer is explained here. This is the second secret which people miss sometimes for their entire life or after many many lives also. And if you don't do this thing, hearing also will not bring perfection. After hearing, a person is supposed to reach a particular stage where he's supposed to engage himself in the second activity. Without the second activity, it's failure. What is that? So it's a very long purport. All of you should read. I am just covering this important segment here's. It is said that the execution of devotional service is so perfect that one can perceive the results directly. This is what we are discussing. One can perceive the results directly. This direct result is actually perceived. And we have practical experience that any person who is chanting the Holy name of Krishna hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare, Hare, Hare Ram, Hare Ram, Ram, Ram Hare, Hare in course of time feels some transcendental pleasure and very quickly becomes purified of all material contamination. So this we all have experienced so much of lust. Greed in the heart is washed away. So many desires are washed away. Attachment they go away. And we develop some taste in hearing enchanting. So a person is practically able to perceive it. This is actually seen. Now Prabhupada is explaining furthermore, if one engages not only in hearing if one engages not only in hearing but in trying to broadcast the message of devotional activities as well or if he engages himself in helping the missionary activities of Krishna consciousness he gradually feels spiritual progress. This advancement of spiritual life does not depend on any kind of previous education or qualification. The method itself is so pure that by simply engaging in it, one becomes pure. So Prabhupada is explaining. Yes. When you engage in chanting in course of time a person feels that he is getting rid of unwanted habits and he develops taste in the Holy Name. But if one engages not only in hearing but in trying to broadcast the message of devotional activities as well or if he engages himself in helping the missionary activities of Krishna consciousness he gradually feels spiritual progress. So this is the point which many many devotees miss. In the absence of sufficient devotee association that participating engaging in the missionary activities is very very important. Trying to broadcast the message of devotional activities of Krishna consciousness is very very important. So unless a person is engaged in broadcasting the message in helping the missionary activities this is what Prabhupada explained. When this Pandal program was happening in Bombay I think it was in Bombay only. And after finishing the discourse for seven, eight days. Then Prabhupada explained. So all of you have come here, you have heard it. But unless you cooperate with us it will not help much. So Prabhupada, definitely you will carry an impression. You have heard about Krishna. This impression is there. It would be there on the mind. But if you want to make tangible progress then you have to cooperate with the activities of Krishna consciousness. And there is a technical explanation also for this. So what is the technical explanation? So Prabhupada is explaining here. So this is another vedanta sutra. So whatever process Prabhupada is mentioning here, it is simply translation of some verse of Bhagavatam or Vedanta Sutra. In the Vedanta Sutra this is also described in the following words prakash Ashakarmani Abhyasat devotional service is so potent that simply by engaging in the activities of devotional service one becomes enlightened without a doubt. So just see, you don't have to necessarily open a book and then you mug up, you understand, you contemplate, you decipher whatever is mentioned in the Vedanta Sutra or other books. Devotional service. If a person knows this most confidential knowledge, it is so potent. Simply by engaging karmani karmani means activities. Simply by engaging in the activities of devotional service one becomes enlightened without a doubt. And there is explanation also. One very famous educationist and politician. He went to meet Bhaktist Dhan Saraswati Maharaj. And because he was very famous, one of the most famous personalities of the country. So he was willing to have association of the Guru himself, the Jagad Guru Bhaktisan Maharaj. So he told I wish to ask something can I have? But because he was a very noble person so he was directed to clean the plates that yes, definitely all your questions will be answered. Meanwhile those my disciples are cleaning the plates, can you please help them? So he was a nice person. He went to the disciples and disciples engaged him in cleaning the plates of Krishna. And when he went back to Bhaktist Dhanmaraj so bhaktis Dhan Maharaj told so you got the answers. So he told yes, Maharaj, thank you very much. I got the answers. So bhaktis Dhan Maharaj gave him the realization that simply by engaging in devotional service you'll get all your answers very very nicely. Prakasha prakasha means this revelation. Cha Karmani Abhyasat it happens by engagement in devotional service. That is why a relaxed life, a comfortable life, it is mentioned in Bhagavatam. It can never bring spiritual perfection. So if our life is going very cozy, very comfortable, then we cannot expect spiritual perfection out of it. Prakash as Chakarmani Abhyasat tapasya in the form of hard work in expanding the activities of spreading Krishna consciousness, this is the secret. This called preaching activity. So thus Prabhupada, it is explained. Here another very nice instance how the devotional activities are so powerful. Narad Muni who is the spiritual master of entire universe all these glorious examples which we hear the disciple who was able to see Krishna in six months which ordinarily takes many many lifetimes for people to perform. And in six months that was success by a small child. Because he was disciple of Naradmani and Prahlad Maharaj in the womb he became Krishna conscious by the mercy of Narad Muni and so many thousands of sons of Daksha they became pure devotee by Narad Muni. And everywhere Narad Muni is having all the great Narad Muni. He has been given charge to spread Bhakti in this universe. His spiritual master of entire universe. His incarnation of Bhakti shakti of Krishna. So how Narad Muni was able to attain this platform? Narad Muni is an exceptional personality who can cross the boundaries of material universe. And he can go into Vakuntha and come back again. And Narad Muni how he attained this platform he is explaining to Vyasudev he was son of a maid servant. So please I beg your pardon. I'll take some more time. It is important topic but please stay put for some time. So Narad Muni was the son of a maid servant. He was not born into a high family. Usually birth in a high family is very favorable for devotional service. Because in family you learn mind control, sense control and many other purifying rituals. But he was born as a maid servant and he was not even having knowledge of his father. There was no father. So just he was there with the mother. But when his mother was engaged in serving great devotees Narad also became engaged. And sometimes in the absence of his mother he would serve the great devotees himself. So great devotees were staying in Chaturamasiya rainy season. And thus when mother was not there directly he was serving them. So Narada personally says once only by their permission I took the remnants of their food. And by so doing all my sins were at once eradicated. So just by once taking prasadam of pure devotee all the sins got vanished. Narad Muni explains thus being engaged I became purified in heart. And that time the very nature of transcendentalist became attractive to me. So spiritual life becomes very attractive for us when past since that baggage is taken away. So Nara tells his disciple Vyas Dev that in previous life he was engaged as a boy servant of Purified devotees during four months of their stay. And that he was intimately associating with them. Sometimes those sages left remnants of food on their dishes and the boy who would wash their dishes wanted to taste the remnants. So he asked the great devotees whether he could eat them. And thus they gave permission. Their permission. Narad then ate those remnants and consequently became freed from all sinful reactions. As he went on eating he gradually became pure hearted as the sages. So just freedom from sins is not sufficient. That is the beginning. Gradually as he kept on eating prasadam he became pure hearted as the sages and he gradually developed the same taste. You eat food from TB patient, you'll get TB. You eat food from a pure devotee, you'll get pure devotion. The great devotees relished the taste of unceasing devotional service of the Lord, hearing, chanting, etc. And by developing the same taste, Narada wanted also to hear and chant the glories of the Lord. Thus by associating with the sages, he developed a great desire for devotional service. Therefore he quotes from Vedanta Sutra Prakasha Chakarmani Abhyasat if one is engaged simply in the acts of devotional service, everything is revealed to Him automatically and he can understand. This is called Prakasha directly perceived. So devotional service. Now you must be wondering so then why? Here we are discussing why Prabhupada is specifically mentioning about the preaching activities. Because different devotees have different purposes. So one understanding is that among all the devotional service that a person can perform, preaching is the best service. So in Srimad Bhagavatam it is mentioned. So the best service as recommended by Sri Chathani Mahaprabhu is this preaching work? Yara deka tarikah krishna katha krishna upadesh amar Agyaya Guru Hayatara aidesh. That's all this is. Preaching doesn't require any good academic qualification. You have got your tongue. You chant Hare Krishna and whomever you meet, you ask Him, you become a devotee of Krishna. That's all. In this we preach and live very nicely. By eating Krishna Prasada, chanting, dancing and then get a life like Narad Muni. This is the formula. So the same thing what Prabhupada is explaining in Bhagavad Gita, Prabhupada explains in other context. So here Prabhupada is explaining that Sath that by doing Karmani engaging in devotional service, a person gets all the revelation, all the knowledge and which is the best kind of devotional service. So as recommended by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, who is Krishna himself. The best kind of devotional service is this preaching work yara Deka Tarekah Krishna Abdesh it is very simple. Whomever you meet, you request them, you please become devotee of Krishna. It is very nice. What God wants. God wants that we make everyone God conscious. Krishna conscious. He sends his son, he sends his books, he comes himself. That is his mission. He wants that all these suffering living entities, they should become Krishna conscious and be happy. God wants it. In the Bhagavad Gita it is clearly stated. So if you want to supply the want of God means the desire of God. God wants it. If you become yourself Krishna conscious and try to serve God by spreading his mission all over the world, that is the best service. That is the best service to the Lord to become yourself a field worker. Field worker. The greatest service one can render to the Lord is try to infuse devotional service into the heart of the conditioned soul. So that the conditioned soul may be released from conditional life. Srila Bhaktivana Thakur has said that a vaishnava is recognized by his preaching work, that is by convincing the conditioned soul about his eternal position which is explained here as nijadharma. So thus everywhere it is told the best service, the best service is preaching. And this is what we will see at the end of 18 chapter. Finally, after giving all knowledge, Krishna tells that yes, my devotee is very dear to me. You offer something for me to eat. He's dear to me, who is not at all disturbed by anything. He is very dear to me, who is not greedy, always satisfied. He is dear to me, who respects all the living entities. He is very dear to me. And then who is most dear to me, who preaches my glories to my devotees. So the preacher is most dear to Krishna. The greatest service is this preaching service. So Prabhupada further explains. So he has kindly come to say bhagavad, Gita, Shotavyah, just try to hear shotavya and kirtitavyascha. Now many people ask that Prabhu I have been hearing but improvement is not happening. So Prabhupada is explaining why if you simply hear and hear in the class of Krishna consciousness and go outside and forget oh, that is not nice, that will not make you improve. So Prabhupada is explaining that you hear and hear and then you forget, that will not make you improved. Then what is that vyasha so Bhagavatam mentions shotavya, kirthitavyascha whatever you are hearing, you should say to others that is perfection. Therefore we have established back to Godhead means the magazine the students are allowed whatever they are hearing. They must be thoughtful and right. Kirti tavyasha not only simply hearing oh, I am hearing for millions of years, still I cannot understand. Because you do not chant, you do not repeat what you have heard, you have to repeat kirtitavyascha. So here Prabhupada is explaining for millions of years if you are simply hearing and you tell that I have not understood, it is not surprising. Prabhupada is explaining why even after millions of years of hearing you are not able to understand Krishna. Because you do not chant, you do not repeat what you have heard. You have to repeat kirtitavyasha. So so much stress is there on hearing, it means yes, hearing is important. But after hearing if we have to actually realize Krishna, then what we have to do is we have to kirtitavyasha we have to repeat the same thing. We have to keep it in our mind, we have to be thoughtful. So thus Prabhupadi is explaining that will not make you improved if you hear and you forget, so if we repeat it to others, we contemplate, we write about it, then it will be effective. And preaching not just helps us understand Krishna. It is very imperative to understand Krishna. Preaching is the great secret for feeling the spiritual progress in life. But it is also very much important and the actual remedy for controlling the senses. So here, this is from. One Sanyasi he's explaining a pastime conversation which happened with Prabhupada. So on Monday morning, Tamal Krishna Maraj took all of us, about 80 devotees. He was one leader in Prabhupada's time, 80 devotees. There were three bus parties who had conversed on Atlanta to see Srila Prabhupada. We all went into Prabhupada's room. Prabhupada started to lean against his bolster and he spoke about Brahmachari life. And he said, my guru Maraj bhakti siddhan Saraswati Thakur loved this brahmachari life. So they were all 80 Brahmacharis. So what they would do is they were working very, very hard. They would not stay at any place. They would just be traveling in the buses. They would sleep in the buses. In this way they would cover entire America simply by traveling in the buses. Their bath is there in the bus. Prasadam is there in the bus. Everything is there in the bus. So my guru Maharaj loved this Brahmachari life. He said, you can sleep anywhere, but if you get married, then you have to get apartment and so much trouble. So this disciple is telling. So when those three words came out of his mouth, my jaw dropped. I was shocked. I thought, he's trying to save us, he's trying to save us. Then a smile went off his lips. Prabhupada, he became grave and his eyes became deep. And he said, so the senses will bite, they will demand satisfaction, he said. And then he pointed his finger at us. But you preach. And he put his hand up and prayed to Krishna. And Krishna can make this itching sensation, go away. And he flipped his hand. But then his hand went like this ah, but it does not go away. And he pointed. In the back of the room were standing Gadhi and Ajadas Grastas. Then like them, you can take. He did not insist that we remain Brahmachari quotes. But my Guru Maharaj very much liked this Brahmachary life unquote. And that's how he ended his talk. As soon as he ended it that way I thought, that's it, no more questions. That's what I am going to do. I was completely convinced. And the crux of this conversation was preach. That was the most impressionable thing of my entire devotional life. So he's telling this was the most impressionable thing of his entire devotional life, this conversation with Prabhupada. So this preaching is not just very important to feel spiritual progress. Prabhupada is explaining if a person hears nicely in the recommended way and then if he also contributes in the activities, missionary activities, in propagating this holy name all across the world, then a person can feel spiritual progress. This is the next level. So it is important to feel spiritual progress in our life. It is very, very important to understand Krishna. Without preaching for millions of years, person is hearing but he will not understand. And then even if you want just sense control also controlling senses is also possible. By preaching Prabhupada so senses will bite. It is not so easy. So when the senses are disturbing if you are preaching then you pray to Krishna and Krishna will take this itching sensation, he will make this itching sensation go away. Because everything is under control of Krishna. So thus Prabhupada recommended preaching as the means to get freedom from the desires of the senses, to get freedom from lust to understand Krishna very nicely and to feel spiritual progress in our life. Another instance, Krishna Shetra Prabhu is explaining. When Srila Prabhupada asked for questions, I raised my hand. I really wanted to know how to give up material desires once and for all. Because unless a person gives up material desires he will keep on taking birth here and how not to accept another body. And here was the perfect opportunity to learn from a person free from all material desires. So in a tight and nervous voice I asked Prabhupada how does one develop his desire to get out of this body? His response was immediate and clear. Srila Prabhupada said simply think of how to push on this movement. Have that desire and no other desire. Anya Bilashita Shunyam no material desire shunyam make zero all material desires simply desire how shall I push on, how shall I serve Krishna? So when these material desires are very tormenting sometimes devotees cry prabhu, please help me, what do I do? It is not going. So Prabhupada is giving the solution here. Simply think of how to push on this movement. No material desire, simply desire how shall I push on, how shall I serve Krishna? So simply by thinking how to push on the movement. So thus this preaching is the secret. This is the final instruction given by Krishna that this devotee is most dear to me and in the future also nobody will be more dearer to me than the person who preaches. So there's the second great secret. First is hearing. So that is why please be very particular about it. So throughout the day as much as possible constantly make this habit, make some arrangement. So we are there in the family in your family. Now you are in lockdown or are there in the same house or you are living locked up in your hostel rooms with your friends. So as soon as you see each other, just develop this simple practice. Remind each other of always chanting Krishna's name. You are walking, you are doing something. Chant Krishna's name and keep on hearing. And other times when you are honoring Prasadam then Prabhupadwani website is there. All Prabhupada lectures are recorded over there. So at least we'll take around 1 hour or 90 minutes whatever in a day to take two or three meals. So 1 hour hearing we can have in a day. That is very powerful. Need not talk about mundane things. Need not switch on television or some video on YouTube. Simply put on Prabhupada's voice and keep on hearing. So at least 1 hour hearing we can do. And you are doing exercise every day which is recommended. You are doing the dishes, you are chopping vegetables, cooking in the kitchen, you are cleaning the house. Whatever you are doing, simply play Prabhupada's lecture in the background or in the earphones. Keep on hearing. So in this way maximize your hearing shramadasha. These are staged constantly throughout the day as much as possible. The name of Krishna or the pastime signs of Krishna keep on hearing practically. So I'll share. Also there is one very nice Prabhupada radio created by Prabhupada Vani. In that radio two channels are there. In one Prabhupada's Vani will continuously keep on being played. Another channel is about the reading of Prabhupada's books audiobooks. So on the chrome you can simply put it on the desktop. It asks like an app. So I'll be sharing on the Telegram channel with all of you. So just try to keep it on your desktop. Whenever you are running prasadam, cleaning, exercising, cooking simply play it and keep on hearing Prabhupada. So try to hear at least during Prasadam time minimum that would be 1 hour of extra hearing. And apart from this throughout the day keep on constantly chanting and hearing. And this reading Bhagavatam we are dedicating our time. Do it with rapt attention and then preaching activity. And how to do preaching activity I do not have enthusiasm, I do not have sufficient knowledge or whatever. Don't worry then the devotees can help you. So I request you to take practical steps and just apply yourself in these two things. And devotional life. Nobody can stop us to become successful hearing with attention as much as possible throughout the day. Keeping association of devotees and engaging ourselves in preaching, in expanding the moment in missionary activities and then we will feel spiritual progress. We will understand Krishna. We'll be always full of enthusiasm. So I'm sharing here the link with all of you. So those devotees who are new, you will find it here. I'll be sharing Prabhupada's radio link also in this channel, Telegram channel. And the books which we just referred to, you'll find in the links here. Prabhupada books. Already somebody has shared Prabhupada radio. So I'm just pasting it here again. And those devotees who now you must be wondering how to do preaching activities. So it is very simple. In the online preaching days simply you have to share. Anyway we keep on sharing on WhatsApp facebook so many things we keep on trying. So just try this thing attempt. So those who wish to do you can contact Risha Prabhu. You can just drop a message to him that Prabhu I wish to preach and then obviously on your own also you can do. But if you can follow system it is very nice. So we have some group of volunteers, we share some post and then they further share it. They upload it. So it will be very nice if you can systematically do it. We'll be sharing one Google Sheet with you and in that you can mark that I've shared on these platforms so we can assess how much sharing and how it is all happening. So if you want to kindly help us in this activity and the field spiritual progress in your life, you can contact Prabhu. If you feel it is very cumbersome, you can do on your own. But if anything is done in a systematic way, it helps us to grow very fast. So thank you so much today I took little extra time, but because these two things are very important, sometimes devotees miss it. They are following everything, but they miss hearing. So just whether the language is right or not, it is in our language or not, just wrapped attentive hearing, we have to do and then we have to preach. That's it. These are the two secrets of spiritual progress. Then we will feel spiritual progress."