"So Lord Krishna has been explaining we saw that this knowledge which he is going to explain, it is a topmost knowledge. It is Raj vidya raj gohyam Pavitram idamuttamam pratyaksha gamam Dharmyam. There is no confusion. You follow some path and you are not sure I'm going on the right way or not. You cannot ascertain, but in this path it is called Pratyaksha vagamam dharmyam. You can practically perceive it. That how you are growing in spiritual life, how you are making spiritual progress. And Krishna also told yaj gyathwa moksha say Ashubhat simply by knowing this knowledge, you will be able to solve all the distresses of life. So this knowledge is topmost. And by following this knowledge, it is such a powerful way which no other yoga process offers. You can see how you are advancing in spiritual life. Not that one final day you'll achieve perfection and faithlessly have to follow, or in good faith, whatever. But you can see your progress happening and all the problems of life can be solved. So 1 may think, oh, it is very difficult. Then all the problems of life will be solved. Such a nice process. The king of all knowledge. So Krishna explains susu kham Kartham abhyayam no it is very, very pleasant to perform. It is not difficult at all. So it is not just topmost knowledge. It not just is able to completely eradicate all the problems of our life. At the same time, it is very pleasant to perform. Usually they tell you have to take lot of hardship, you have to struggle, and then you can do something worthwhile here. But that is not the case in spiritual life. It is being told it is susukam, it is very, very pleasant to perform. Then 1 may ask what is the difficulty? Then everyone should follow it. If it is topmost knowledge, it is very easy to perform, all the problems of life will be solved. Then why people don't take to it? That Krishna answers today. So please read this verse very carefully. Why is that? Despite it being convenient at all ends, very clear why people are not able to pick it up. Lord Krishna explains text number three we'll be seeing. This is the first verse today ashradadhana purusha Dharmas yasya parantapa aprapyamamni vartante mrithyu sansara virtmani those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot attain me, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in this material world. So this word is very, very important. Shadha So Srila Prabhupada explains in the Purport the faithless cannot accomplish this process of devotional service. That is the purport of this verse. Faith is created by association with devotees. Unfortunate people, even after hearing all the evidence of the Vedic literature from great personalities, still have no faith in God. They are hesitant and cannot stay fixed in devotional service of the Lord. Thus, faith is a most important factor for progress in Krishna consciousness. In the chaitanya Charitamrita. It is said that one should have complete conviction that simply by serving the Supreme Lord Sri Krishna, he can achieve all perfection. That is called real faith. So here it is being mentioned why people are not able to follow it if it is so nice as we have discussed, because they lack faith. So Prabhupada tells, we are there in the dark well, and somebody is putting a rope inside and he's telling, please come out. Now. If we lag faith upon that person or that person, who knows, if I hold the rope and he may drop me in between, I will die. At least I'm living now. Or he may take all my money, he may kill me, kidnap me. So many doubts can be there. So in that case, a person will not be able to hold the rope. So although it is very easy, that person will pull you out simply you have to hold the rope. The process becomes very simple. But Ashadadhana Purusha, those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot attain me. Oh, I also do not have faith. I mean, I have little faith, but I do not have much faith. People may think like that. So that is all right. That is why Prabhupada is explaining. This process of creating faith is called Krishna consciousness. So this Krishna consciousness is nothing. Now, some people would have started Krishna consciousness long ago, maybe from childhood or from previous life or many lives before. So then they have natural faith in Krishna. As Krishna explains, automatically such a person will be attracted to Yogic principles, and somebody would have just begun as a novice. So that person may have very little faith, but does not mind. From whichever position a person has begun, this process of following Krishna consciousness will help him advance in one's faith. And how that faith is created, Prabhupada is explaining also, we hear entire Vedic literature from great personalities also. First of all, it is difficult to find Vedic knowledge. And that too becomes effective when we have heard it from the great personalities. But here, Prabhupada is telling there is a possibility, don't think, if you have found a great personality and he is giving you exact Vedic knowledge, you will understand. Prabhupada is telling unfortunate people, even after hearing all the evidence of Vedic literature from great personalities, still have no faith in God. And what is any example of any such personality? The example is there, right in the Bhagavad Gita. And the example is the person who spoke the first verse of Bhagavad Gita. That is Dhritarashtra. Dhritarashtra had the opportunity to hear the knowledge of God. This Rajividya from Vidur. Vidur is incarnation of Yamraj, one of the twelve Mahajans, twelve greatest authority, who are responsible for spreading spiritual knowledge in the universe. Twelve greatest people on the universe. And one of such person is available as his brother, and he is giving him all good counsel. But Dhitrash was not able to understand. So thus Prabhupada is telling faith is created by association with devotees. So this association is very much required. A person may be very near to spiritual master, sitting very close to the spiritual master. But he's not having proper association separate. Then he's just like a bug who is sitting on the lap of the king, simply biting the king. So physical association is not necessarily an association unless all the six principles are implemented. And what are those six principles that we have discussed before? Dadati. Prati Grahanati, guiyam akyati prachyati bhungte bhojyati Chaiva. Shadvir, priti Lakshanam. These are the six patterns in which a person is supposed to engage in association. So if such association is not there with devotees, then it is not possible to have some faith. Now we have somehow stumbled upon Bhagavad Gita. We have some faith. But if we don't keep this faith, Prabhupada explains and we associate with materialists, then whatever faith we have, that will also go away. So right now we also have some faith. Nobody is faithless in this world. So now whatever faith we have, most of us have the general people. Those who are there in the session or most of them are not there. Everyone is having faith. And this faith is the result of association. Faith is the result of mode of nature. Thamas will produce certain kind of faith. Rajas will produce certain kind of faith and Satva will produce certain kind of faith. Thus there are varieties of scriptures for those who are Tamsik. They cannot put faith in Vishnu ordinarily unless they come in association with devotees. So for them different puranas are there. For Rajasik people, different puranas are there. Sathvik people, different puranas are there. So now somebody is having faith that yes, money will make me happy. So this is also one kind of faith. Or a big house and car will make me happy. This is another faith. Promotion in my company will make me happy. This love affair, sexual life or family affair will make me happy. This is another faith. So why all these faiths we have created in the association? Because we associated with Bollywood, with some movies now we have created all these affairs will make me very much happy. And the sexual enjoyment will make me very much happy. This is a source of pleasure just because of association. We have picked up because of association of greedy materialists. So most of us are having the faith that if I get money, if I get more money, accumulate money, then I'll be happy. I'll be very satisfied in life. Because of this so called propaganda. We think if my child goes to a good school and where the best people of society go, then my child would be very happy. So this is also association, the association, the propaganda. The media is so like, oh, this person got so much rank and there are band parties and everything. People are dancing, putting sweets in his mouth, garlanding him and oh, just see, this is pleasure. So daughter, son, you also work hard like this. That will make you happy. So this is our faith. But now with our limited experience, personal experience or by hearing from others, we can understand that does not lead to happiness. So this is called blind faith. So this is also faith. This is not fact. Money does not make you happy. Relationships don't make you happy. Rather, they are the leading causes of distress. Family is the leading causes of suicide in the world. Maximum number of suicides happen because of family issues. And the person thinks if I have family, good family, large family, let me get quickly my son's, daughter, grandsons married as soon as possible. Let me see the face of my great grandson. That is my desire. And family will make me happy. Although I have seen so far family has not made me happy. My son got married. Now my daughter in law is pulling my son away. Now the son is confused. Should I go to Mother? Should I go to wife? So we are seeing all these instances every day. But this is called faith. This faith we have created because of certain association with the materialists. In a similar fashion, if we associate with devotees, devotees have a different kind of faith. What kind of faith devotees have. So as I discussed long back, I think it was in the second chapter when we are discussing the day for spiritualist is night for materialist. So we discussed the story of Srila Madhavindra Puri. So Srila Madhavindra Puri is grand spiritual master of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. And Madhavindra Puri is the Acharya who revealed the highest ecstatic devotional service of Krishna. It was revealed by Srila Madhvindra Puri. And Madhvindra Puri was such an exalted sage completely absorbed in love of Krishna. He would travel oblivious whether it is day or night and absorbed in thoughts of Krishna. He was traveling like this. Traveling Mahadwindrapuri. He reached Vrindavan and he had taken a vow that I would not eat anything unless somebody completely dependent upon Krishna. Unless somebody supplies. So just see if somebody supplies, he will eat. Otherwise he would fast. So this was the vow of and this Sadhana people would follow. This is called ajagarithil. Just like a snake is there, snake is sitting in one place and the pythons especially and the food automatically is provided by Krishna. It would eat again. It would be there in the same place. It would hardly move. It will not put an effort to go after the prey. In a similar fashion, the yogis they practice like this. They would be lying down, sitting or roaming around without actively searching for food. When food comes to them automatically they would take it. Otherwise they would fast. So Srila Madhavindra of course I mean Madhavindrapuri was not doing any Sadhana he was a Paramahansa, completely perfect soul. So in this way completely absorbed in thoughts of Krishna. Srila Madhavindra Puri was traveling. And he reaches Vrindavan. So in Vrindavan, when he was following this kind of fasting, completely dependent upon Krishna. Krishna personally brought milk for Mahadwinder Purpuri. And that time Krishna did not reveal himself and he gave him pot that I will come back. I am here taking care of cows. Please drink milk. I'll come back to collect the pot. Madhavindra Puri drank the milk. He's waiting. The boy is not coming back. Then in dream Krishna revealed you did not identify me, I was waiting for you. And then he told that I am there in this hillock over Govardhan. So please take me out. I am feeling lot of heat over here. Please take me out, install me and start worshipping me. For a long time I have been here and then so this is the proof. Now you know Nadwara Srinaji is there. Very very famous temple of our country. And Dambani is here. That is your favorite deity, Srinaji. So Srinath Ji was called Gopalji. So these were the four prime deities which were carved by Vajranab. Vajranab is the descendant of Krishna, the Yadu dynasty. Almost it was taken along with Krishna. They fought with each other. That was Krishna's plan. Because nobody could have finished them. They are all transcendental, completely spiritual. So Krishna made this plot. He took them away. So Vajranab was left behind. So Vajranab had not seen Krishna. So he wanted to see Krishna. So with the help of Vajranab, he carved these four deities which were resembling Krishna. So just see, all the evidences are there. Why should somebody tell? This is mythology. And all these deities, the history is there. Who carved these deities? Vajranab, the great grandson of Krishna. And then after that the entire history is there. Then Mughals attacked. Then the deities were hidden in the jungle. So on top of Govar, the hill, this Gopalji deity was hidden. And now when we can understand again arche Vishnu, Shiladhi, guru Shindarmati, we should not understand. These deities are shila or stone. Krishna can come in any form. Krishna can come in animal form. Krishna can come in human form. Krishna can come in invisible form. Krishna is rather always present in Vrindavan. Vrindavan. So Krishna is always present in Vrindavan. Sometimes he becomes visible. And in Dhwaparuga at certain time, once in a day of Brahma, other times Krishna remains invisible. It may appear that Krishna is going to Mathura. It is not a fact. Krishna never leaves Vrindavan. Another expansion of Krishna, Vasudev, Krishna, he goes to Mathura and he goes to Dwarka like that. But Krishna is always krishna has no task killing the demons and other things. Krishna is just enjoying in Vrindavan with his friends. So Krishna became invisible in Vrindavan. But Krishna was and is always present in Vrindavan. So sometimes Krishna is present in an invisible form. Sometimes Krishna is present in the form of animal. Sometimes Krishna is present in the form of a human being or he can take any other form. Similarly Krishna takes a form which appears like that of a stone. As soon as you carve a stone Krishna is personally standing there and the form appears like it is resembling a stone. So it simply resembles a stone. It is not stone and thus this is the evidence and many many evidences are there in India. So Gopalji personally he told Madhavendra Puri that I am here and that path was very very difficult because it was completely covered. It has been many many years, hundreds of years and it was not easy to reach. So Madhvindra Puri told the villagers that Gopalji had given me darshan. He has given instruction. He's waiting for us to receive our seva over there. So we have to cut through this jungle and take out the deity and start worshipping him. So they started cutting the bushes and removing the clearing the path. So it was not easy to go there. How somebody can figure out who is not a resident of Vrindavan. Madhavindra Puri was simply traveling and as he entered Vrindavan he got this instruction. So Madhavindra Puri established Gopalji over there and then he told him that I am feeling lot of heat still I'm not satisfied by this abhishek. They performed abhishek ceremony put gallons of water as a bathing ceremony to the Lord. He told please bring sandalwood paste for me. So the sandalwood you'll get around Bengal. So you please go there and fetch it for me. So Madhavindra Puri on foot from Vrindavan he started traveling towards Bengal and then he came across another temple which is called Gopinath temple. So this Gopinaji when Madhavindra Puri was having darshan and special offering was happening and as offering was taken inside he asked the Pujari that what is this offering. So they told the special sweet rice is offered to Krishna here. So Madhavindipuri thought oh sweet rice they are offering if I can taste this sweet rice then it would be so nice. I can also cook similar sweet rice. Sweet rice is very nice thing. I will offer for my Gopalji over there the same sweet rice. And as Madhavindra Puri was thinking like this immediately the temple bell rang and then Madhavindra Puri felt shattered. Oh what offense I have done. How much greedy am I. I desire to eat something which was meant for Krishna which was not offered. So it's a regulative principle. When we are cooking for Krishna we should not taste it. We should not even think of eating it. We should cook simply completely absorbed in the consciousness that I am cooking it for Krishna. And once we offer it to Krishna then as remnant we can honor it. So this is the way of accepting prasadam for Krishna. We should not think oh it is very tasty when will I have it? Then it becomes contaminated so it becomes juta. It is meant for Krishna. So Madhavindra Puri felt very bad I am so greedy and why did I desire. Although it was not his fault but the advanced devotees think like this. They always want to think they are faulty in this way they want to always maintain a humble position. So Madhavindra Puri felt very bad and in that awful state he left that place and then he was resting somewhere in the same town in the marketplace. And when Pujari then he took out the offering and Pujari put the deity to rest and he also went to rest. Then in dream gopinaji he tells the Pujari that my great devotee Madhavendra Puri he came here today and he desires to taste this sweet rice. So I have stolen one pot of sweet rice from the offerings. It is kept here behind me in the altar. So please come inside the altar take the sweet rice and then Madhavindripuri is sitting in this place in the city. Please go and offer this sweet rice to him. So Pujari told how it is there that I have missed one cup of offering. It has never happened in the past and he was very eager and Pujari in great eagerness he went entered inside and then he sees in the exact same place one pot is kept there. So he became ecstatic that Lord is so merciful and I could not identify his pure devotee he had come here today. So immediately he went searching for Madhavindrapuri at night and Madhvindra where are you? He was shouting. And then as per the direction given by Krishna he was able to find Madhvindra Puri and he gives this pot to Madhvindra Puri. You are so glorious. He offers him respects obeisances that Krishna has stolen the sweet price for you today. And Madhvindra Puri as he hears he comes in ecstasy and with great taste he takes it with great pleasure he tastes it, he keeps it with him and offering respects to the Pujari he now becomes afraid. Oh now these people will get to know that Krishna has shown this great favor mercy towards me. So while we become very famous and this fame is very very dangerous I don't want to become famous immediately. Overnight he left the town and he moved towards Jagannath Puri. So just say this is called faith. We work very very hard so that we can have some fame in life. First desire is money. Money does not satisfy then fame or XYZ so many things we desire but see this is the desire of pure devotee. A pure devotee thinks so I should not have this fame at all. This is very dangerous. We think if I become very rich, very famous or if I'm able to associate with the people who are rich, powerful and famous be in their company have friendship with them then that would be very nice for me but the devotees spiritualists think otherwise. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu denied. I don't want to see the king. King Pratap Ruddhar was very famous. King Very, very powerful. All the Mughals and Pathans he was not allowing them to enter his kingdom. Although entire, almost entire country they had captured, but they were not able to enter the Odishan Province. And Prataparudra was very nice, very noble person, a great devotee of Krishna and Lord Chaitanya he somehow was requesting through his devotees can Mahaprabhu please give me Darshan? Just I once want to meet him. But Mahaprabhu told no, I don't want to see his face because this is the injunction of the scriptures. Nishkin Chanasya bhagavad bhajanon mukasya param param jigamishur bhavasagarasya atasandar shanam vishaynam yoshitamcha hanta hanta vishabhakshano apyasadhu so any person who has decided to cross this ocean of repeated birth and death, he should avoid the association of materialist. Like a person avoids drinking poison or it is told it is better to take poison than meeting a materialist. So association of materialist is so very much dangerous. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu rejected even to see the face of a king here. People are very, very eager when great presidents, they arrive in the country. So much arrangement is done. And once former president of US, he came to our center in Jaipur and the roads were cleared and such great arrangement was there. And we have to approach for donations for various people and sometimes they would reject, they would not meet. One of the duty of Brahmacharya is to go door to door to beg for donations. And we approach to some people and they are very difficult to reach. And these people, now they are sending their CVS to US. That I want to meet kindly please Prabhuji, give some time. I want to meet former president of US. And those rich people, famous people, when they came, some of them were able to shake hands with him, were able to meet him. They told Prabhu, thank you so much. My life is successful today. So people are so very much eager to meet former president of US. But this king who was so powerful, Chattana Mahaprabhu told I don't want to see the face, simply seeing the materialist contaminates. Because usually, although this was a pious king but the kings in Kalyuga, they have fallen. And the kings live in great opulence and they enjoy all kinds of pleasures. So such kind of pleasures are very, very dangerous for a spiritualist. And it is experience also sometimes if you meet a very hardcore materialist. So just like one reporter, he met one of the richest persons of our country and he told after his interview he could not take rest the entire night because this person, industrialist is so passionate about making money. So he took a dose of passion and that passion could not let him sleep the entire night. And one devotee also was experiencing that, was explaining that once he also met a very successful businessman. And this person was so much charged. You can feel the charge their passion. So simply by their association a person gets contaminated. rajoguna Tamuguna gets infected. So the Shastra still do not associate. Do not even see. So just see. This is one faith. We are willing to become famous, willing to become rich. And this another faith is what to speak of becoming rich or becoming famous. Do not see even the face of the people who are like that. So this is the difference. So how this faith? A person develops simply by association. So one faith is there that love for money will make me happy. Love for car will make me happy. Love for technology, Gadgets or knowledge will make me happy. Love for any person would make me happy. But all these things do not love for the nation would make me happy. Just like Mahatma Gandhi, he loved the nation, worked so hard for the nation. He followed brahmacharya in the service of the nation. And after all this service, what happened? Unfortunately, he lost his life in the hands of one of his countrymen. For the same countrymen he struggled so hard the entire life. But people were not satisfied with his policies. And his associates revealed that the same morning he was telling that why this country is facing this thing today. I did not work hard for this. Why I am living, I feel like dying. And then he left his life the same day. So love for anything in this world does not satisfy us. But we can see anybody who has even little love for Krishna. Just he's following simply the instructions of a spiritual master in the service of Krishna, that person becomes completely satisfied. So thus we can understand that faith in Krishna is not blind faith. Rather, the faith of materialist is blind faith. So that is why we should have sanity. We can understand the life of Chaitanima, Prabhu, Madhavindra, Puri, all the other devotees. Even now we have so many devotees serving Krishna. Even little faith. If they execute the five items which we discussed in the previous to previous session the principles of Bhakti Yoga they become so much satisfied in their life that they don't feel other demands in their life. But otherwise, a person who is having blind faith on material resources, people or positions they are always dissatisfied in their life. So thus it is very easy to develop faith. But just like now, after hearing, you may develop some faith. But if you go and associate with the materialists, don't associate with devotees then whatever little faith we have cultivated that also will be lost. And those who are not faithful, they cannot take advantage of this process which is very pleasant to perform, which is easy and which solves all the problems of life. And they return to this birth and death again in the material world. Aprapimam nivartante they are not able to attain Me, such people. So this faith can be created. Faith is created by association with devotees and which is real faith. Because any person who follows such faith, he becomes completely satisfied and happy. Mayata tamidam sarvam jagadavyaktamurtina Masthani sarva bhutani nacha hamtesha vastitah by me, in my unmanifested form Now Krishna has started revealing. So Krishna first told do not be envious of Me Anasuya way. Because you are not envious, I am giving you this knowledge. A person who is faithless, he will not be able to appreciate this knowledge. But Arjuna is very faithful. So Krishna is explaining him now the topmost knowledge. Knowledge about his personality, himself, the absolute truth by Me in my unmanifested form. This entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in me. But I am not in them much thani is Sarvhutani. So we may think that we are situated in some state, on some planet, in some galaxy. But here Krishna is telling Matsthani Sarobhutani actually all the living entities are in Me, but I am not in them. In the next Loka, Krishna tells nachamats in previous Loka Krishna is telling Matstani Sarobhutani all living entities are in Me. But here Krishna is telling no nacha Matstani Bhutani pashima yoga. Maishwaram bhuta brin. Nacha bhutasto mahatma bhuta bhavanaha. And yet everything that is created does not rest in me. So first Krishna told everything rests on Me. And then he's telling yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold my mystic opulence. Although I am the maintainer of all living entities and although I am everywhere, still Myself is the very source of creation. So how to understand this? Everything is situated in Krishna and yet everything is not situated on Krishna. So like this contradictory statements we'll find in the vedas these statements are there to help us understand that Krishna is not an ordinary person like us. So what is the meaning of this statement? So this statement means Prabhupada explains just like somebody can tell the whole nation, the weight of entire nation is there on the shoulders of the King or the Prime Minister. So what does it mean? That actually he is responsible. He is taking responsibility. He is maintaining the entire nation, the Prime Minister or the King. But it does not literally mean that on his shoulders the entire nation, all the lands they are situated in a similar fashion. But there could be son or grandson of the King or Prime Minister, he would actually be sitting on his shoulders personally. So in a similar fashion Krishna is telling all the living entities are situated on Me. It means on Krishna's energy. Just like the sun is there and Sun's energy is there. We have discussed many times sun and Sun's energy is different at the same time. It is non different. Because energy and sun cannot exist independently. Only sunlight is there, sun is not there or sun is there. Without its. Light, both are not possible. Sun and light are connected, thus they are one entity. At the same time, they are different. Also, as we understand, touching the sunlight does not mean touching the sun. So in a similar fashion, just like the sun is emanating sunlight, krishna is emanating energies from him and the entire material creation as well as the spiritual existence that is resting on Krishna, means on the energy of Krishna, but not personally on Krishna. So this is what Krishna is telling us, that although everything is resting on me, still I maintain my personality. I am aloof, I am situated in the spiritual abode. Yatakashasito Nityam Vayu Saravata Go Mahan Tata Saravani, Bhutani Mastani Tiupadharaya as the mighty wind blowing everywhere always rests in ethereal space know that in the same manner all beings rest in me. Sarava, Bhutani kante Prakritim Yanti Mamikam kalpakshai Punastani kalpada Visrajamyaham now Krishna is explaining the cycle of creation and annihilation. O Son of Kunti at the end of millennium, every material manifestation enters into my nature. And at the beginning of another millennium, by my potency I again create. So Krishna is telling creation, Maintenance, destruction it is happening as per my will, under my control. Prakritim SWAMA vashtabhya vistajami punafpuna bhutagramam imam kritnam avasham prakratir Vashat. The whole cosmic order is under me. By My will it is manifested again and again and by My will it is annihilated at the end of day. The navadasi nam asaktam Teshu Karmasu o dhananjaya. All this work cannot bind me. I am ever detached, seated as though neutral. Now somebody may accuse after reading all these shlokas so, Maintenance, Creation, Destruction, everything is happening. Under control of Krishna means all those deaths which are happening now in the country. For this destruction and death, Krishna is responsible. So people may start blaming Krishna. Krishna is not a just person. He has taken my relatives away or somebody's relatives away. So much pain Krishna is creating young people, he's taking away why this is happening. So Krishna is not a good person. That is why in the very next loca this loga Krishna clarifies his position. Nachamam tan tani karamani nibadnanti dhananjaya o dhananjaya all this work cannot bind me I am ever detached, seated as though neutral. Just like it is a fact that any kind of reward or punishment or death in a court happens as per the authority of Judge. But it does not mean that Judge is a bad man. If somebody is getting killed hundred people are getting killed because of Judge. It does not mean that Judge is implicated. Judge is a bad man because Judge is ever detached, seated as a neutral person. But he makes sure that the laws they are put in place and they are implemented nicely. So if the person has done good deeds, he will be rewarded. If the person is a criminal murderer, he would be hanged or given capital punishment. So, just like the Judge is there. He's simply implementing the laws in a similar fashion. Krishna, although everything is under his control but Krishna is not personally taking care of this material world. He has simply put laws in place. And as per the law somebody is enjoying or somebody's suffering like somebody asked a question this Sunday that how Krishna can save you and me. When Krishna is not able to save so many people who are met with various atrocities. So the understanding is people are meeting bad fate or they are reaping some good rewards basis their own actions. Krishna is neutral. Maya dhyakshena prakritihi suyate sacharacharam. Heparivartate now here. Krishna reveals a very important point. So we are able to understand that yes, nature is doing this thing. Nature maintains a very nice ecological system. Nature has given nice intelligence to our bodies that they can evolve, they can adapt to the environment. Nature is very intelligent, everybody agrees. So how something dead matter can show intelligence on its own. So here Krishna is telling Maya Dhyakshe in a prakriti suyate sacharacharam the material nature is working under my direction. O son of Kuntiya Jagadviparivartate. And it is producing all moving and unmoving beings by its rule. This manifestation is created and annihilated again and again. So this point is very very important to understand. So one devotee was explaining once when Prabhu was studying in some college and in those old days there were no ATM cards and other things. So if the parents have to send money then sending money order was the only way or one of the ways. So when money order comes to you and the postman has to give it now if a person thinks oh, this postman is giving me money and he goes back and complains to the father that I was there in the college for four years and the postman was taking care, he was bringing me money every month. But you did not care to send money even once, then that is foolishness. Or if the postman he would also bring some penalty, some order from court that you have to leave this property or something, is there some punishment, some fine? And if a person thinks oh, this postman is bad, always he's bringing bad news, he is bringing fines to my house and penalties. So let me kill this postman, then my penalty problem will be solved. So that is also foolishness. This is the foolishness which the entire scientific community or non scientific or every materialist is engaged in. They think postman is the cause of my happiness or my distress. They think if I am suffering because of some person in my family, let me go away from them or let me remove the person, they are the cause of my distress. Or if some country is cause of my problem, let me leave the country, go to some other place that will help me have a good thing or the government is bad or the weather is bad or something. XYZ is bad, the job is bad. Let me shift to a better job and solve the problems of life in this way they think this postman is creating the problems in my life. And if you try to remove the postman, kill the postman, what will happen? More problems will come in life. So that is what is happening. We want to get relieved of the immediate cause of our problem and not caring for the ultimate cause. Oh. This virus is creating problem. This virus is the source of all the diseases. Let us somehow eliminate this virus from the body. So in this way we are trying various ways and means trying to counteract the effects of the nature. But nature is just like a postman. Krishna is telling here Maya Dhyakshiyana Prakriti thus this knowledge is so important. So it is told. He tries to understand what is the ultimate cause of all causes. Where is a question of happiness? You have to figure out who is sending me money. Your father is sending me money. If I write to my father, if I'm obedient to my father, I love my father, I take care of him, he will send me more money. Otherwise you write to postman, postman please bring more money. No. And how postman will bring any money? You may keep on writing demanding like that. So in a similar fashion we have to understand the troubles of our life are given to us. Not because of XYZ some immediate causes. We have to understand ultimately what is causing all these problems of life and who is creating all these pleasures in my life. Both are created by Krishna and I suffer because of them, because of my actions. So krishna is ultimate cause. Krishna is arranged for troubles. Krishna has arranged for pleasures also. So if I surrender to Krishna completely as Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita, he will tell at the end of this chapter. This is most confidential knowledge. Immediately a person is relieved from all the troubles of life. Otherwise without surrendering to Krishna, without surrendering to the police if you try to kill the guard who is not letting me escape from the prison I will be more tightly for a longer time and with greater punishment be bound in the prison. That is why we see people are creating more and more stresses in their life. People are getting more diseases. You solve one small disease, big disease will come. Small diseases were happening in the country. Diarrhea, cholera, they found something. Now cancer started happening. It was not heard of in India when Prabhupada went to America and people are telling. So Prabhupada told in your country you have different disease. We may be having malaria more. US is not having malaria but you are having cancer. We don't have cancer. So all these new new diseases we are creating more diseases we are creating. So if we try to solve the immediate cause. That is foolishness. We have to go to the ultimate cause. What is cause of cause of cause of cause of ultimate cause. Cause of all causes. And that is explained in Dhamma samita anadiradir govinda sarvakaran karanam. He is the cause of all causes. So please surrender unto him and try to obey him perfectly. That will solve all the problems of life. So some people do not understand avajananti Maura manushim Tanumashritam param Bhavamajananto mamabhuta Maheshwaram so fools deride me. Avajananti Maurha muda means foolish people. They do not understand my supreme form. Manushim Tanumashritam when I come in manushim tanom in human form they deride me. Param Bhava Majananto they do not know my transcendental nature. Mama Bhutto Maheshwaram and my supreme dominion over all that be. So some people, they think, oh, Krishna is just like a prince and he was maybe a yogi, a magician. He became very powerful, a good politician. But they think just a man, a powerful man. So this is not the right understanding. Krishna is telling they are Mudas. They are foolish people. Param Bhavamajananto they do not know my transcendental nature. Mama Bhutam Maheshwaram so here Krishna is telling knowledge about himself. Mama Bhutt Maheshwaram I am the controller, proprietor of everything. All the material elements, everything that is created that is under my control. Param Bhavam you don't think I am having a body of your nature? You are controlled by material nature. My body is completely spiritual. So thus Krishna, he was having great grandsons, having 125 years of age. But Krishna was always young. Nitya Navya navayamana. Krishna was always young. Like a 1520 year old boy, krishna never appeared old. So thus this is the nature of Krishna's body. It is completely spiritual. So those who are thus bewildered, who are not able to understand krishna is God. His body is completely spiritual. Although he looks like a human, he is not a human. Who are thus bewildered are attracted by demonic and atheistic views. In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, their fruitive activities, their culture of knowledge are all defeated. This is what is happening in society today. So people want to perform some activities, fruitive activities which will give them good results in future. Or they want to cultivate knowledge. But the result of all this research, setting up big institutes, universities, publishing research papers and working very hard for enjoyment, the result is that I am getting more and more complicated, more and more entangled in this life. And miseries are increasing. So that Krishna has already declared one who is not able to understand that Krishna is the source of all creation. Everything is resting on Krishna. He will be completely baffled in life. So Krishna tells. So there is another category of people who are not bewildered like this. And they are called, they are the great souls. Mahatmanas To Mampartha Daivim Prakriti Mashritaha Bhajanti Ananya MANASO Gyatwa Bhutadim avyayam so people are confused and especially in today's age where so much cheating is happening how do we understand who is a Mahatma, who is a great soul? So here Krishna is explaining God himself personally. O son of Pritha. Those who are not deluded the great souls are under the protection of divine nature Devim Prakritim, Ashrita so they are not under the control of Mohinim Prakritim the bewildering illusory energy. They are under the control of Devim Prakritim bhajanti Ananya, MANASO, Gyatva, Bhutadim avyayam they are fully engaged in devotional service because Gyathwa because they know Bhutadim avyayam they know me as the supreme personality of Godhead original and inexhaustible. So here Krishna is telling how do we understand who is a Mahatma? Bhajanti see again the word is being used bhajan he is engaged in devotional service. And how he is engaged ananda Manasa without any deviation, without any confusion that oh. If I serve to Krishna, if I render service to Krishna then I may suffer in life. And so many complications can happen. No Anandya Manasa without any deviation is completely surrendered to Krishna. He is worshipping Krishna. So externally a Mahatma may appear just like an ordinary man. A Mahatma can be having the same height, a Mahatma can have the same complexion. And apparently he can be a very ordinary man. And he can ordinarily eat, he can ordinarily sleep. Generally we think Mahatma means he should have some powers, he should do some extraordinary thing and maybe he should not eat at all or XYZ so many other he should not wear clothes at all. And so many other conceptions we have. But if you see when Krishna also came here he also was eating, he also was sleeping and chattana Mahaprabhu when he came here he also was taking rest, he also was eating and so many other things. So thus we should not try to understand Mahatma by the external activities. Yes, sometimes some Mahatmas they can actually display mahatmas have all the powers. So sometimes the Mahatma can display their extraordinary powers. But sometimes they may behave just like an ordinary man, an ordinary person. But we have to understand there is a vast difference. So 1 may see Mahatma as being old, 1 may see Mahatma as getting diseased. Also a person may see Mahatma as external behavior. He could be doing business also. And a person may think he's just like a materialist, a businessman but he can be a great Mahatma. So then Krishna gives next qualification. What they are doing? Satam kirtayantomam yatan. Tasha Drtaha Namasyantasate Satam Kirtayantomam so somebody they ask you you are doing kirtan, you are doing chanting. Where is it mentioned? In the bhagavad gita. So we can tell. It is mentioned here in chapter nine, verse number 14 satam Kirtayanto Mam satana means always Satan kirtayanto always they are engaged in kirtan. And whose kirtan they are doing kirtan of any other Devi or Devta? No. Ma'am. Kirtayanto. Mam. Only person is chanting name of Krishna always. Not sometimes, constantly. He is a Mahatma Yatantasha Dhravrata and he's endeavoring with great determination. He's offering respects to me, worshipping me perpetually worship me with devotion. Nitya yukta Upasate so the picture that we see here that we had shared in the creative that picture is of Srila Rupa Goswami. Srila Rup Goswami is the immediate disciple of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. And Rup Goswami and his brother Sanatan Goswami, they are the founders of modern Vrindavan. They revealed all the holy spots which got covered in course of time. After the Mughals came, they attacked and entirely covered into jungle. All the deities were shifted to Jaipur and other places or hidden just like Gopalji and Govardhan. So these Goswamis reestablished the places under the guidance of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. So Rup goswami and Sanatan goswami. So they were brothers and they were Prime Minister, finance Minister in Bengal. So after they took Sannyas Ru Goswami with their third brother third brother was Anupam Prabhu. All three of them were there. They had renounced but somehow Anupam Prabhu could not survive and he left his body quite early. So these devotees were meeting Chaitanya Mahaprabhu in the presence of Valabhacharya. Valabhacharya we know he's a great devotee of Krishna, very stalwart scholar. So Ru Goswami, Sanath and his brother, they were presenting themselves as because they were associating with the Muslims and they had adopted their culture to a great extent. So a pure devotee always wants to keep himself in a humble position. So they were not coming near. They would stay at a distance, far away. And then Chaitanya Mahaprabhu invited them, please come here. And they were not willing to come near. And then Chaitanya Mahaprabhu introduced that actually you are very exalted scholar and they are afraid that they are not very purified so they are staying away. So Allah bhacharya then saw towards Rub goswami. And then he saw that both the brothers, they are constantly chanting the names of Krishna. And because he was a great scholar, he was devotee. He understood that no ordinary person can do constant chanting of Hare Krishna throughout the day. So then he quoted, he gave reference also from the scriptures tepus, Tapaste, Juhubu, Sasnur, Arya, Brahma Nochur Nam Grananti that a person who is always chanting the names of Krishna is immediately qualified to do Yajna. It is very, very difficult. In the Vedas it is written to find a Brahmana who can do Yajna. So the Yajnas are very, very powerful. When Maharaj Parikshit, his son Maharaj Janmajiya got to know my father was killed because of this snake, deceitful snake, he became very, very angry and he told, let us kill this snake and how to bring this snake. He must be living somewhere, hiding somewhere. So then he told he organized a powerful Brahmanas and he told organize a Yajna that all the snakes should fall into this yajnakund. And then that deceitful snake also would be killed. Takshak. And then they did this powerful Yajna by the power of this Yajna, this mantra in that great Havan Kunda, all the snakes, not just from this planet, but other planets also start getting attracted towards. And they started falling into that Kunda. Then the great personalities, they interfered. And he told that please stop, do not do this thing. So the Yajnas were very, very powerful. And a person can achieve anything by performing Yajna. So we need very, very exalted Brahmanas. They would sacrifice an animal in the Yajna. Animal would come back, spring back into life immediately. In this way they would test the efficacy of the mantras. So first of all, it is very difficult to find a Brahmana. Among many, many scholars of the Vedas who are expert, you can find one Brahmana. And among many, many Brahmanas you'll find a Yajnak Brahmana who can do Yajna. But it is told a person who is always chanting the names of Krishna is immediately qualified without any rituals, any sanskaras to do the Yajna. And such a person, he has studied all the Vedas. He has finished his Vedic study. Vedas are huge. But such a person has already finished the Vedic study. He has visited all the places of pilgrimage. He has done all kinds of charities. He has done all kinds of tapasya, Tepus, Tapasu, Nam, Garanti. A person who is always chanting your name. So they are not ordinary people. But now people do not know the science. How to understand a Mahatma. So Mahatma is always chanting the names of Krishna satam Kirtayantomam, 24 hours. So this is Authorized Version given in the Bhagavad gita satatam kirtayanto mam always chanting the names of Krishna, Yatan, Chasha, Drirata Another very important thing is yatan tasha driravrata. Driravata means endeavoring with great determination. So this determination is very, very important in spiritual life. So Prabhupada explains that we are figuring out so many ways to become happy. But Prabhupada tells nobody can be happy in this world unless he is disciplined. So we do not know the simple thing. This is called satvaguna. Simply following the discipline given in the Vedas and the person would be happy. So nobody can be happy in the world without being disciplined. And can we do self discipline? Prabhupada tells nobody can be disciplined if he is not a disciple. So thus always a person is supposed to follow some authorities who discipline him. And only the pure devotees, they are beyond any authority. They are not under the control of state laws. Also because they are directly under control of Krishna. So unless somebody has reached that platform, we have to follow the rules and regulations of the scriptures with great discipline. Thus, we tell many times, whatever you decide, these many rounds I will be chanting. Please try to stick to it without fail. So at this time of the week I would hear Bhagavatam or Bhagavad Gita, morning, evening, whatever you have fixed, so please do it without any fail. And I was very happy to hear some people were so much determined as when we don't have this Bhagavad Gita discourse, we have RDU sessions bhakti Raksha program where Bhagavad Gita in a sequence is being discussed. So I told them that you please, you have to attend every day, make sure you are there. So although the lockdown opened and they started visiting their offices so they are riding on the bike, but on the bike they are putting on the earphones and trying to be present attend this Bhakti Vraksha. And now we see they have advanced so nicely. So simply Krishna is seeing Prabhupada tells that if you do this Hare Krishna Mahamantra, we can be very very attentive and we can try to put all the focus concentration techniques into it and we can get relief from the miseries. But love of God, we will not attain by that. So we have to chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra in an effort to please Krishna an entire day. We have to be very very sincere in pleasing Krishna. So Krishna is seeing our sincerity from the heart, our endeavors. Only when is satisfied with the endeavors krishna and spiritual master, they give this strong attraction towards Krishna attaining which all the other desires everything fades in life and the person is completely satisfied. So thus Yatantasha Dhridavrata endeavoring with great determination, great discipline is very very important. So that is why Prabhupada would tell in Purport you'll find that the rules and regulations of spiritual life should be followed in a military discipline. Although that may make things little difficult, but nevertheless it has to be executed in such a way. An example we see from the life of the Goswamis RUV Goswami sanatan Goswami great discipline they were following in their life. And although they are not at all, they are paramhansas. They cannot be attached to anything, anybody. But still RUV, Goswami sanatan Goswami, they would change their places one night under one tree, next night under another tree. So sanyasi, this rule is there that you may get attached to tree also. Just see, attachment is so dangerous. If a tinge of attachment is there in the material world a person has to continue revolving in the cycle of birth and death. Krishna will give us chance to fulfill that desire which we have associated in the association of we have got in the association of materialist. This thing will make me happy. If some hope is there, Krishna will make sure that hope gets fulfilled. So that we can personally realize oh, this is also not making me happy. So after lifetimes of such experience or this does not make me happy, that does not make me happy. When this faith becomes firm in that nothing makes me happy, then a person is able to surrender to Krishna. So thus even if a tinge of desire is there, person will not. So these regulations are there. Do not even stay under same tree the second night. So they were following these rules and regulations with great avow determination. Sanathan Goswami at an old age he took a vow I would do Govardhan parikrama every day. Govardhan Parikrama is 23 km an old man every day. Can you expect him to walk 23 sanathan Goswami was doing that. So one day when he was doing parikrama then Krishna personally appeared. And when Krishna personally appeared Krishna told Sanatana Goswami sanatan, why you are doing this? You have become very old, you need not do this parikrama anymore. So he became very happy that Krishna personally has appeared. But he told that Krishna this is my vow so please let me fulfill it. So krishna became very happy. So Krishna told okay it does not matter. So on this very stone which I am standing you simply you go around this stone and that will give you merit of doing Govardhan Parikrama. So that stone is called Govardhan Shila that is still kept in the Radha Dhamoda temple. So if you come to Vrindavan trip along with us. If everything is fine, we'll go with this Karthik again. So there that shilla is there on which Krishna's footprints are there and Krishna's sticks print is also there. And Krishna also appeared along with his calf. So the calf's hoof print is also impressed on that stone. So all these wonderful pastimes. So the understanding is Goswamis were so very much determined. So they don't need to follow all such tapasya. They're already perfect. So that we can understand how much determination is required in spiritual life. So ours is a very personal process. By our determination without failing for a single day yes we will fail again. We have to rise. We have to determine. Come to a platform where we don't fail. Then. This is called Mahatma namasyantash Chamam bhaktiya nikte yukta upasate. And he is bowing down before me. So these Goswamis like Raud Nadas Goswami, he would bow down also with counting 1000 dandavas he would do every day. Can you imagine? dandwat means completely you fall down, again you stand up and again you fall down like this 1000 times. And he was hardly eating anything, just little buttermilk every other day. And he would hardly sleep 1 hour or 2 hours maximum. Sometimes that also is forgotten. But he is doing this rigorous thing thousand times dandavat. So this offering obesience is bowing down before me. It is also an authorized process. These great souls perpetually worship me with devotion nitya yukta upasate. So here Prabhupada is explaining. So one must be wondering. So this very advanced position, maybe there is one in the world. But Prabhupada explains here he can live this life in devotional service, guided by an expert spiritual master and in any position, either as a householder or a sanyasi or a Brahmachary, in any position and anywhere in the world, he can perform this devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus actually become Mahatma, a great soul. So it is not that only a Sanyasi can become Mahatma like this. And those rules and regulations which we discussed, they are there to set an examples. Now Prabhupada personally has mentioned in this age it is not possible. 500 years ago they were able to execute such penances. But simply if you follow the rules and regulations of spiritual master which rules regulations are there that you can see here highlighted fasting on Ekadashi certain days it comes twice in a month and on the appearance day of the Lord or the devotees, et cetera. So these simple rules and regulations are there. Chanting few number of rounds every day following four regulative principles, associating with devotees, simply honoring only prasadam. These simple rules and regulations if we follow then we also can become and we have to become Mahatma. Here is told either as a householder of Sanyasi or Brahmachary in any position anywhere in the world a person can become Mahatma. So to become Mahatma is not difficult. Simply we have to find such association of a pure, very advanced devotee and take his perfect guidance in life. So any person who is not doing this and today if you analyze in the world, in our country hardly you'll find a person who has this understanding. Nobody would explain that Krishna a person is the source of everything. They would tell Krishna some energy and like that which Krishna does not explain here. Or they would tell to chant some other name of some other God. Krishna is telling Satan Kirtayanto Ma'am, you chant my name and always engage in my service. So these simple things nobody can tell. But if these simple things we can follow with mind, body, speech we can engage in service of Krishna, chant always his name and follow these simple rules and regulations with great determination we also can become Mahatma. So thus it is very easy to find a Mahatma and easy to become a Mahatma. Prabhupada is writing here and in any position we should endeavor especially the Sampradaya of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. He has appeared, god personally has appeared not for just little bit of spiritual advancement. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu has come here to offer us the highest spiritual advancement which is rarely obtained even in millions of years. So we should take advantage of this simple process. It is very very rare opportunity and attain this position. And when we attain this position we also can aspire for a life like we heard of Rup Goswami Sanatana Goswami Madhavindra Puri Srila. Prabhupada completely absorbed in the thoughts of Krishna and completely life is blissful. And Krishna personally is talking to them, giving them association, personal guidance."