"Lord Krishna has described the knowledge about Himself and those people who worship Krishna in complete knowledge of Krishna, that he is the source of all the manifestations and the entire existence. So Krishna is explaining the position of the top most transcendentalists. So there is materialist and there is transcendentalist. Materialist means he cannot understand anything beyond matter and material enjoyment. Transcendentalist means they understand there is something beyond matter, what I perceive and conceive. So among the transcendentalists also who delve in the spiritual domain, the topmost transcendentalists are called Mahatmas, the great Souls. So what is the characteristic of these great souls? Ananya chintayanto mam ye janaf paryupasate they do upasana of Krishna. And how do they do? Upasana ananya chintayanto mam. Without any deviation, without any other object. Always they are focused on meditation upon Krishna and Satam. Kirtayantomam yatantasha dhravrata satam always incessantly kirtayantomam they are chanting the names of Krishna. So this is the qualification of Mahatma and Yatantas with a great determination, great vow. So determination is very, very important for attaining success in spiritual life. So Prabhupada tells disciple asks Prabhupada that Prabhupada, why this Maya is so strong? If ultimately we have to go to Krishna and Krishna is supreme power, we are trying to serve Him, then why this Maya is so strong? So Prabhupada told because your determination is not strong. If you are determined enough, Maya cannot touch you. And if you are not determined, then even Krishna cannot save you. Prabhupada told so what does it mean? If we are not determined, then even Krishna cannot save us, because Krishna does not interfere with the living entity. We have been hell bent to enjoy material sense gratification and we have prayed to Krishna for many, many years or probably many, many lifetimes. Krishna, please sanction this material enjoyment for me. And so Krishna has sanctioned it. Now if you show determination krishna, enough. I have seen this is not at all satisfactory, rather full of miseries. Please kindly take me out of this. So if we are determined in this way to engage in the service of Krishna, then Maya cannot touch. And if we are not determined, then even Krishna cannot save. He will not save because we do not want it. Exactly. So thus being determined is also very, very important. And how do we become determined? Prabhupada explains people do not know the secret. If anything you have to do with determination. The secret is brahmacharya. A person becomes very powerful by following the brahmacharya. He gets the strength of mind. So people are not aware of the secret of determination. So that is why the celibacy brahmacharya is recommended for any spiritual discipline. So Yatatantashra, Dhravrata a person has to be determined to make advancement. He is always chanting the names of Krishna namastyantaschamam, Bhaktiya, Nitya, Yukta, Upasate and he's always offering obeisances respects unto Krishna. So these are the qualities of Mahatma and Srila. Prabhupada tells so Mahatma, do not worry that oh, Mahatma means great soul. It is very rare soul. Yes, it is definitely a rare chance. But this Krishna consciousness movement is giving opportunity for everyone to become Mahatma. Not just brahmacharis, not just Sannyasis. Even grahastas. Prabhupada tells, I don't have any such policy that Grahastas cannot become Mahatma. And then Prabhupada explained the example so I am very proud of my disciples, six of my disciples. So Prabhupada is explaining this lecture in I think, 1969 or 70. So Prabhupada had sent the six Grahastas to London and we saw eventually how they brought a turnaround in the worldwide Krishna consciousness movement. And these were only grahasthas. And which kind of grastas? Western Grastas. They were. So Prabhupada told, this is something extraordinary happening. Now, grastas have never been into preaching. So preaching, it requires great qualification, great strength, spiritual strength. Only then a person can preach. Preach means not only you have to defend your faith, but you have to help others to come to the real platform of faith in Krishna. So Great Sanyasis, great Brahmacharis, they are engaged in the work of preaching. But this time now Grastas are engaged in preaching. And women who are supposed to be meant in taking care of the household duties in the regular varnashrama system, now they are also doing the same work as men are doing. So this thing is something extraordinary we have done. So Prabhupada told, this is Krishna consciousness movement. In this there is no impediment at all. And I'm proud of my disciples. They are grahastas. But these Grahastas are also doing extraordinary preaching. So Prabhupada requested that it does not matter if anybody takes shelter of this. Krishna consciousness movement follows these simple principles. We have to use our tongue, use it to vibrate Hare Krishna with practice, as much as possible throughout the day and with determination, try to engage in the service of Krishna, offering him respects. In this way everybody can become Mahatma. So this is the perfection of Krishna, of any living entity to come to the state of Mahatma. Now today we will see what is the position of other beings who are not on this level that Lord Krishna is explaining. Now in the successive shlokas of Bhagavad Gita text number 15, as you can see on the screen Ganaya gaina chapyana PETA bahudha Vishpatomukam. Now Krishna has described anya means others. So many people tell no, gyana is the process. Ghyana means people are proud, bhakti means for sentimentalists and Gyana means this is meant for advanced people, advanced transcendentalists. Devotees means sentimentalists. But they have not read Bhagavad Gita nicely. At least we can see here very clearly it is mentioned ya gaina others who are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge, worship the Supreme Lord as the one without a second, diverse in many and in the universal form. So very clearly Krishna is telling anay there are others who are not Mahatma. Mahatma. Daivim prakriti mashritaha. The Mahatmas. They completely surrender themselves unto me. There's the condition of Mahatma and then Upasate, they worship me with great love. Others cannot be called Mahatma only devotee who has completely surrendered to Krishna always engage in service of Krishna without any other diversion. He only is Mahatma. And people who follow the path of knowledge Ghana, they are called Anya. Others who are engaged in cultivation of knowledge. So that is why tomorrow if anybody challenges that I am following the path of Ghana, you tell him. So why you don't want to become Mahatma, a great soul. So why do you want to get stuck somewhere on the staircase? When you have elevator present with you, quickly rise to the topmost floor. Now in this Krishna is explaining the three different segments of the Vedas. So the vedas are divided into Karmakand Gyan Khand and Upasana Kand. So the topmost section is Upasana Kand where a person is taught to become submissive to higher authorities and he starts worshipping various other higher personalities. And eventually the culmination of upasana kanda is Krishna worship. And that is called Mahatma who has reached the end of Vedic knowledge end of Upasana Kanda. And those who have not developed the understanding of Upasana worshipping then they keep on speculating what is truth, what is false. That is called gyan knowledge. So those people who are cultivating knowledge, they are following Gyan Yajna. They can be divided into further three categories. Ekatwena prithaktwena and bahuda vishwato mukham. What does it mean? Akatwena means monism. They perform aham grahupasana. It means many times you would have heard because it is very nice to know that oh, you are God. This is a philosophy which tells that you worship yourself. Just like now to the deities we offer flowers, garlands and many other things. So people who follow the path of Ekatwena ekatwena means monism. There is no other thing. There is only one soul. One soul only you are seeing. It is manifesting itself into so many forms. The example that they give is just like in dream. It's your dream only but you only see all those forms. All these forms are your expansion only which you see in the dream. But in illusion you perceive that there are many pluralities, many individualities. However that is not fact. When you wake up, all those multi personalities and perceptions they vanish. And then you understand it was only you, just you were existing. So this is the reality of this world. Actually everything is one consciousness. You are hallucinating, you are not existing in the world. The world is existing in your brain. And there are various all these varieties that you see around you. That is only an illusion. So all these people, personalities, animals around you, you see they are expansions of yourself. That is you only in different forms. So very dangerous philosophy. So it tells there is only one consciousness and thus that God, whatever you call you are only that consciousness. There is no difference between you, your guru or God or any other living entity. It is you only in different forms. Those forms which have realized that what is reality, I am living in illusion. Those forms are called forms of God. And those who have not realized, they are forms of us, the living entities. So thus they think that I have realized now I am God. So they start worshipping themselves. They will do their own abhishekam. They will put garlands upon their own self, put flowers on their own head. This called monism. So there is another class which is called Prathaktwena, which in English is called Pantheism. So what is pantheism? It means yes, there is consciousness. But that consciousness takes many, many forms. And I can imagine any form. So they do panchapasana. And all the demigod worship, they also fall into this category. They think that God only has taken all such forms. And I can worship any of these forms. This is called prithaktvayana. And then there is another category who are not able to have any higher understanding than what they can perceive. So that is called Vishwato mukham bahuda vishwato mukham diversity. So they worship the vishwaroop, the universal form of Krishna. So just like as the soul enters the body, the body develops into certain form. In a similar fashion as Lord Krishna enters into the material universe in the form of Vishnu, akam To, Mahata Srishtir Dhrityam. To understand sitam. First, Vishnu form enters into material energy. Second form enters into the universes. And that second form which has entered the universe because of the presence of that form of Lord Vishnu, just like the soul is present in this body, the body develops. If the soul leaves the body, there won't be any development in the body. So the universe also exhibits various manifestations. And there come trees, mountains and all life forms they develop. The devtas they appear. The Dhanavas, they appear and oceans appear. And so many varieties that we see around us, the sun, the moon, the planets. So this form is called universal form. The universe has taken a form because of presence of Krishna in the universe. That is called universal form, vishwaroop. So for some people God means this entire universe is a living entity, huge living entity. And that they worship as God. And we are part and parcel of Krishna. So they tell yes, we are part and parcel of the universe. In that way they understand I am part of God and God means this entire manifestation. So for those people who cannot understand spiritual subject matter there is spirit apart from this and there is spiritual form for them this kind of meditation is also recommended. Because it is not just like sometimes when you tell somebody we are not the body, we are spirit, soul, some people may not be able to understand sometimes we also can have some doubts. So it is not easy to come to the spiritual understanding. Only when person is very, very satvic, they can understand. So for such people to bring them gradually to that spiritual platform, this kind of meditation is recommended. Okay? This universe you perceive has got some intelligence. Everything is being carried out so systematically. So worship the universe. Now how to attach themselves to universe? Ultimate purpose of vedas is to attach somebody to God. So a person cannot be attached to something impersonal. So they imagine that this universe is there in the form of a man, a person. And the clouds are the hair of that person. And the oceans, they are the navel of that person. The sun, the moon, they are the eyes of the person. And the mountains, mountain ranges, they are the bones of the person. The rivers are the veins of the person. And the trees, vegetation that you see, these are the hairs on the body of that person. In this way they perceive that this universe has got a form. This imaginary form is called the universal form of Krishna. So some people, they are just meditating as soon as they see everything. Any tree, oh, this is hair on the body of Krishna. Oh, these mountains, they are the bones. In this way they are learning to meditate upon God. And it is a fact this universe is a body of God, but not the spiritual body. When Krishna enters in a spiritual body in the universe, the universe takes a form. So it is a material form of God. So this is the basic meditation which is recommended to everybody, those who are not able to understand the personal feature. So these are the three categories. You worship yourself and you worship yourself means the understanding is to be given to the living entity that he is not spirit soul, he is not matter. He is spirit soul. And the spirit soul is very divine because it is part and parcel of Krishna. God is worshipable. So every part of God's body is worshipable. Anything which is connected to God is worshipable. So that is why it is told Tattvamasi you are that you are. That means God is also spirit and you are also spirit. But you are small, infinitesimal, part and parcel of God. You are not the infinite God. So in this way, but you are also divine because you are part of divine. So in that way, self worship is recommended. So a person who is sane, who is not envious of Krishna, he can understand I am God. What is this statement? I'm worshipping myself, but if I go outside, nobody cares to worship me but Krishna. So many people are worshipping. So can I control the planets? Can I create any new universe? No. This is not in my power. I have some disease. I have to go to doctor for toothache. I have to rush to dentist. So I cannot be that supreme controller. Oh yes, I am in quality same as God. I am not this matter. I am spirit, soul. So this understanding can dawn upon the monast. Thus such processes are recommended that you can worship yourself. Because you are divine. Part and parcel of supreme divine. But some people get confused with the philosophy. And then they start understanding that oh, I am that supreme divine. I am God supreme Controller. So sometimes people get befooled in such manners. So this is called the Gyan Kand, the second portion. And some people are there who are not even up to the mark that they can understand gyan. They can understand knowledge. Just like most of the people here. They want to become happy without any desire to understand what is truth. It is great foolishness, isn't it? So a person is driving and it is very difficult for him to drive. Sometimes he sees some vehicle suddenly rushes. Sometimes the traffic suddenly stops and he does not inquire. That why this traffic is moving like that. He does not understand the symbolic representations. The traffic lights. Red means stop, it is saying. And greens means you can carry on, you can move. So he's bewildered why this is happening. So unless he understands the truth he will always remain bewildered. And he will meet with an accident. Fine. And so many other things. So we are suffering but we don't have desire to understand what is truth in this world. So this is called foolishness. However, for such foolish people also the Vedas recommend Karmakanda. And what is karmakanda? They do various sacrifices. So Krishna is telling here aham kratur aham yagyasvadham, aham mantra jam aham agnir aham Hutam. But it is I who am the ritual, I the sacrifice, the offering to the ancestors, the healing herb, the transcendental chant I am the butter and the fire and the offering. So to those people who follow the Karmakanda portion they do various yajnas. So those people who cannot think anything other than material benefit just like many times some people who are pious they come in touch and we tell them why don't you please chant nicely? Just chant 16 rounds, follow four principles and nobody can stop you from making your life successful. They tell yes, Prabhu, now I can chant only one round. I'll chant more. I just want to have two more hotels with me and then I will start more. Or I just want to crack this exam. Or I just want to finish this thing then I will do this thing. I will get my son married. Or then I will start various engagements. People quote so people are very much although there is some understanding but they are very much enamored by material benefits. So to such people Karmakanda portion was recommended. You have some material desires, you perform this yajna. And as we are discussing in last or previous to that session how recently Maharaj janmajaya after Parikshit Maharaj did such powerful yajna that all the snakes from various parts of the universe. They started coming and falling into that sacrificial altar. And when a person does the sacrifice immediately he can see I wanted some weapons, weapon has come out. I wanted child, child has come out. I wanted some kingdom. I am able to achieve that. So in this way, by performing this Yagya, people can see practically. So there is one instance mentioned in Srimad Bhagavatam where a king, he was not having any child. And it is responsibility to produce a child. That is obligation also Vedic obligation. Because the ancestors, they need somebody who can offer them oblations. If ancestors have done any sinful activities by accepting that oblation, they can be relieved from the hellish, life or whatever troubles they are having. So thus it is the duty to produce a child to take care of the previous generation's. Forefathers there is some law of nature which works like that. So he was very anxious that how can I produce, how can I fulfill my obligation? And somebody has to be there to rule over the kingdom also. So then he did some yajna and the rishis, after successful performance of yajna, they prepared Sanctified water. And that water the queen was supposed to drink. And then the king would have a child. But in the middle of the night the king became very thirsty and he started searching for water. And mistakenly he drank that water which the queen was supposed to drink. And actually the king became pregnant. So this is the power of yajna. So a person can immediately develop faith. Oh, these Vedic yagyas are so powerful. They can make even a man pregnant. And somehow he delivered the child also. But because he was under the protection of Brahmanas, brahmanas are very dear to Krishna, very powerful. He did not die, otherwise a man would die after delivery. So somehow he was able to deliver and still survive this accident. So like this people would perform various yajnas and they would see the result. And this is called Karmakanda portion fruitive activities. You are doing certain activities so that you can enjoy some result of it. So here Krishna is telling. So whatever you are doing, you need some butter to be put into the yajnakunda. You need fire to be ignited into the kunda. You have to put various herbs and so many other things. You have to chant some mantras. Krishna is telling I am everything, there is nothing beyond me. I am the butter, I am the sound, I am the Yajna, the fire of the Yajna. I am everything. I am the offering to the ancestors. I am everything, I am the entire ritual. So Krishna is telling there is nothing beyond me. That is what Krishna is giving. The confidential knowledge in this chapter that there is nothing in this world except Krishna means Krishna and his energies. Just like the sun and the sunlight. We have discussed many times over in a similar fashion. In this world there is nothing but person Krishna and the energies which are continuously emanating from Krishna, nothing else. Just like we understand in science, energy can neither be created nor be destroyed. It can only be transformed from one form to another. This is law of conservation of energy. Same thing Krishna tells energy cannot be created, cannot be destroyed. So we are spirit, soul, we are energy. So the scientists only are telling, they preach this law of conservation of energy and they have difficulty in understanding. When you tell God is eternal and spirit soul is eternal, so they won't believe, they will tell, no, no, spirit soul cannot be eternal. Matter is producing god cannot be eternal. This is illogical. Then your law of conservation of energy is illogical. You only are telling in your law, energy cannot be created, cannot be destroyed. So Krishna is telling, yes, spirit, soul is my energy. Energy cannot be created, cannot be destroyed. So everything is Krishna's energy. It is transformed from one form to another. All this matter that we see, it is also transformation of same spiritual energy. Energy is only same spiritual energy. It is transforming. It transforms as matter, as light, as heat, as sound, as butter and so many things that we see around us. But it is nothing but Krishna, krishna person and energies of that person. Krishna tells pitahamasamayajurevacha, I am the father of this universe. Pita. Aham mata dhata pitamah. I am the mother also. So Krishna is telling, I am the father, I am the mother. Mata Dhata Pitama dhata means supporter, pitamaha means the grandsire, the grandfather. I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support and the grandsire. Vedyam Pavitram om kara rik sam Yajur EBACHA. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllable Om. I am the Om Kara, the om vibration which people chant, I am also the Riksam, Yajur Avacha, the Riksam and the Yajurvedas. So Krishna is telling, I am the father. So Lord Shiva is called the father of the universe and Goddess Durga, she is called the mother. So this material energy, she is the controller, presiding deity of all material energy, Goddess Durga. And just like the scientists are telling this matter is pretty, that they cannot deny that this material nature is producing all the bodies, but it is illogical. Just like if somebody tells no mother is producing child, no, father is not required. Yes, it is a fact. If a person who is not aware of the process of reproduction, he may think, oh, just mother is producing child without the help of father, no help is required. So in a similar fashion, the soul is given by Lord Shiva and then the matter which covers that soul, that is given by Goddess Durga. So Krishna is telling father and mother both I am and then Pitamaha. Pitamaha means grandfather. So Lord Shiva appeared through Lord Brahma. So Lord Brahma is called Pitama grandfather. So Krishna is telling I am Brahma also. So Brahma, Shiva, Durga, they are also part and parcel of Krishna, the infinite personality. So Krishna is telling there is nothing beyond me. All the devis, all the devatas, all the human beings, all the animals, they are just my expansion. So in that sense they also can be called God. So that is why sometimes if the Vedas are telling that Shiva is God or Durga is God Goddess or Ganesha is God, that is not wrong. Prabhupada gives example. Just like you can tell this car is Ford, this is Maruti. So you can tell the car is Ford. But you cannot tell Ford is car. No, the Ford is producing car. All the cars he is producing, controlling. But the Ford cannot be called car. Ford is not car, but the car is Ford. In a similar fashion, Krishna is telling here that I am Pita, I am Mata, I am the grand Zaira, I am the grandfather also. So they also can be called God. But God cannot be considered. These living entities, they are all part and parcel of God. If you touch my finger, it can be told that you are touching me. If you hold my finger, it can be told that yes, you are holding me. But in one sense you are not holding me, you are just holding my finger. So in this way the Vedas want to tell sometimes that any living entity that you see that is part and parcel of God only, that is non different from God. In the sense they are all divine, they are all completely spiritual. But sometimes people mistake that it is suggesting that it is whole God that is mistake. They are not the whole personalities, but they are part and parcel of the whole God. Gatiru bharta prabhu sakshi Nivasa sharanam Surith Prabhava pralayastanam nidhanam bijamavyam. I am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the abode, the refuge and the most dear friend. I am the creation and the annihilation. The basis of everything, resting place and the eternal seed. So here Krishna is using this very important word. Gatir bharta prabhu sakshi. So Krishna is telling Gati I am the goal. So whether a person is following any process, he's a hardcore materialist, ignorant of even Karmakanda, just want to live like animals, enjoy life. Or he's a fruity worker, he's following the Karmakanda portion. He wants to enjoy material gratification. Or he's following Jnanakanda. Ultimate destination is Krishna only. So this material world is a reformation center where ultimately all the living entities they wanted to experience a life of God. So they are made God and sent here. And they wanted to have independent enjoyment without God. So they are given experience. Okay, you please go there and you try to enjoy. But then living entity will not be able to enjoy. So after all these experiences, ultimately living entity is going back towards Krishna. Krishna is the ultimate destination of everybody who is there in this material world. And the more we keep ourselves away from the destination, the more we suffer in this material world. We have to continue the journey. So unless we reach the destination, journey continues. So that is why it is told by the Vaishnavacharyas karmakanda gyanakanda Kevala vishay Rabhanda so some people may be very proud. I am following the Vedic process very very nicely. But it is told Karmakanda ghyanakanda Kevala vishayra bhanda these other segments of the Vedas, a person can be very proud. I am following all the rituals very nicely. I do Dhana, Punya, Charity, tapasya and all these other things which are recommended in the Vedas. Somebody may tell I am reading all the Vedanta Sutra and I have understood I am not the body, I am spirit, soul, I am eternal. And people may think they are following spiritual life, but that is not spiritual life. It is being told Karma kanda gyanakanda Kevala vishira Bhanda these are just pots of poison. If a person has actual knowledge of Krishna, he will consider all other Vedic activities also as pots of poison. Poison means it brings repeated birth and death to a person. If you drink poison, you will die and your heart will burn. So thus very nicely, all of you can go through this song. Bhaktivanotakura sung asha pasha shatta Shatta clay Shadiya Avirata that I am bound in this material world a vishaya halahale divanishi hiya jwalay judah ITE nakainu upai so halahal halahala is a very dangerous poison. So Bhaktivanuthakur is telling a vishaya halahale. So this vishaya, this sense objects which I am enjoying now as a materialist, of course Bhaktivevino Thakur is an Acharya. But the Acharyas take a position of a common man and they write these poetries in humble mood. So Bhaktivino Thakur, a pure devotee of Krishna, he is writing this wonderful Vaishnav song anadi karama Falejali that because of so many fruitive activities which I have been doing since time immemorial pari Bhavar navajali I have fallen into this Bhav Arnava. Arnava means ocean, bhava means to become. So we have fallen into this ocean and in this ocean we are taking various forms, different species, animal species, bird species, worm species like this various species I'm taking I fall into this Bhava Arnava in this ocean, in this material energy where I keep on changing forms. And while I take different forms, what do I desire? I desire this sense objects. But now I have realized the sense object is like vishaya hala hale this vishaya enjoying object of the senses which we all very very mad. Enjoying the eyes, enjoying the tongue, enjoying the beautiful music, enjoying the skin touch sensation. So this is like poison. Diva nishihiya jwalay day and night my heart is burning in this thing. So sometimes we think I have not got enough vishayas with me, enough objects of enjoyment. With me. That is why I'm having dissatisfaction in my life. But no that is not fact. As recently we have seen another celebrity couple so called very successful person in the material terms. So they have filed for divorce or they have taken something like that. All of you must be aware. So this person is considered the most wise man, very successful man. And just to work in his company, his former company people the best of the brains would work very very hard if I can just work in that company. And he is the master of that company. That company has been in the top of the world. It has ruled the world for a long time. So he has been successful. He has been richest person of the planet for many many years. And he got the love of his life. But see what is the result even after love of life. Divorce. Divorce is not an easy thing. How much heart burning happens? How much dissatisfaction is there in life? Fights are natural divorces. When there is extreme fight, extreme dissatisfaction. And even after divorce it is not easy to forget. Your partner person always remembers. But then they cannot tolerate even living together. Prabhupada explains. So this knot is very very strong between man and woman. So if they separate it is still even after separation a person may take divorce or he may take sannyas. This knot is very very difficult to give up. That is why in the Kaliyugaite is told that please don't take sannyas. Because there is no Brahmachary training. This knot which is anyway difficult to give up. Nobody would be able to give up easily. So thus the heart is burning. The most successful person, the richest person got the love of his life. When you don't get anywhere your heart will burn. If you get then also your heart will burn. So this is the evidence and Bhaktive Thakur is telling divanishi Hiya Jwale my heart is burning. Mana Kabu Sukhanahi Paya I have never got pleasure by enjoying these sense objects. I have got only burning of my heart day and night. So why am I entangled in this? When I realized that it is burning my heart why don't I give up? This vishaya. So next Bhakti Vanathako tells Asha Pasha Shatta Shatta kleshadaya Avirata because of this Asha because of this hope these so many desires. Asha pasha. So this ASHAs are compared to Pash? Pash means nose in the neck. So I have caught by this nose. Just like animals you dried them with the help of nose. You pull them anywhere. The dog you can pull. The cow you can pull. Donkey you can pull. So with the news in the neck. So what is this news which is driving in this material world. Asha Pasha Shatta Shatta so animal has got just one news. I've got hundreds of news and they are pulling me. I have desire. Let me have one more car, one more job, one more business, one more child. Marriage of my child, marriage of my grandchild. And one more one more like this. So many asha Pasha Shatta Shatta I am so badly entangled. Even though my heart is burning I don't have any hope of release because of this. So many news, hundreds of news. And these news are nothing but material desires. They are holding me in this material world. So they are pulling me in all the directions. And my heart is also burning. Never satisfied by these vishayas. So very nice song you can read anadi Karam Fale Pari Bhavan very beautiful song. So these songs are very very powerful. They are expansions of Hare Krishna Mahamantra. So sitting in front of Krishna we can sing. So many such vaishnav songs are there. By Bhakti minutakur Narutam das thakur so by Srila Prabhupada we can sing the songs These are very very potent songs. Full of all spiritual realizations. So Bhakti Minutakur is telling. Now even if a person is able to give up these noses these material desires ganakarma thugadoi, Mori, Pratadiya Loi now there are two more robbers. Highway robbers. Just like the robbers plunderers they cheat a person. Thug. Thug means a person who cheats a person and takes away all his wealth. And they can kill them. In a similar fashion I have got these two cheaters, two thuga highway robbers. Who are they? Ghana and Karma. So in this jungle, in this material world I am lost. And in this jungle these two robbers they have caught me. Ghana and Karma. Karma means this fruitive activity. It is cheating me. I am thinking just if I am able to have this material attainment then I'll be happy. Then there would be settlement in my life. Who is settled in the life? Ask any old man, is he satisfied? Have his planning? All his plans have got fructified. Is he satisfied? Has he stopped his planning? No. Still plans. Unlimited plans he's doing. Old men are also having many many plans. So that is why Lord Rishabh Dev when he was going to retire krishna's incarnation father of Bharat Maharaj we discussed Bharat Maharaj's pastime some time back. So Rishabh Dev when he's retiring, he was king of the planet. He is giving instructions to his sons that please do not he gives various instructions become devotee of Krishna worship Bharat who is very advanced devotee by serving him you will serve me. I am incarnation of Krishna. And then he tells one more instruction make sure that nobody makes plan. Now we have planning commissions in our country, in all the countries. And they make plans how to have material enjoyment. Rishabh Dev, the most powerful king Krishna's incarnation citizens were very happy under his rule. So Rishabh Dev tells make sure that the living entities, the subjects do not make any plans for material enjoyment. So the duty of the government is not to help people make plans of enjoyment. This is the basis of all the election manifesto I will give you material happiness. But the election manifesto should be I will never give you material happiness I mean material satisfaction. Obviously we need to satisfy our needs but any kind of planning to increase material happiness government should make sure people don't do such planning. Because any kind of material enjoyment more than required for keeping body and soul together it acts like visha, it acts like poison and the heart starts burning in that suffering. So Rishabh Dev is telling please make sure the subjects do not plan for material enjoyment they plan only enjoyment of Krishna krishna satisfaction. So this is one cheating that if I get some material profit, some material situation I'll be happy in my life. See from these examples these people are so successful still their heart is burning day and night we will never be satisfied by all these attempts. So there is another thing when a person is able to realize this karma is not helping me person gets trapped by Jnana then he starts speculating oh Krishna is God or not? These instructions are right or not? What is God, what is reality? Mental speculation this kills a person so material desires it is very difficult to come out of its nose. If a person is able to come out of the nose then there are these mental speculation it does not let us surrender to Krishna. So Prabhupada's teacher is telling this is fire you can utilize it for cooking if you touch it, you'll get burned and all such things so a person who is simple he can use the fire very nicely and a person who is a scientific minded very this thing he does no, I will experiment first will it work or not? So if you do experiment, it may take some time after that you can utilize somebody tells if you push this button, this is accelerator car will speed up you push this is brake, this is clutch and this steering like that it will function. So a person tells no, I want to do research how it functions will it function like that or not? So he can do research, he can become automobile engineer and then he can learn to drive. But a person, he simply picks up the instruction from the user manual from the creator and he starts driving the car and his life is successful. Need not understand how car is functioning. Somebody is given to you, use it and give it up. What is the need of understanding mechanism? So many complex mechanisms are there when Krishna was explaining to Arjuna his potency is arjuna was inquiring so Krishna is telling Arjuna what you will do? Arjuna by understanding all these things? ATVA bahuna tena kim gyatayana tavarjuna arjuna what you will do by this research work A Kanshana Jagat only by one ansha of mine I am maintaining this entire universe this is my potency. What you will understand about me, my creation, you cannot understand. By one unshaf mind I am maintaining this entire Jagat, entire material creation. So thus there is no limit to Krishna's energies. A person will get bewildered. So take advantage of the process. Krishna is giving simply. But the Ghana does not allow us. Mental speculation, unlimited doubts. So bhakti vinod thakur is telling gyana karma tagodui mori pratadayaloi. These are torturing me. They have caused me grace, harassment. These two tagas highway robbers. Enu Samaya bandhu. So he is telling kripasindu you are the ocean of mercy. Now at this time when now I have become very old. It is time for me to leave this world. I have no hope now. My senses cannot enjoy any more material activity. So please help me. Give me your shelter. So very nice prayers. Bhaktiyana thakur is not telling. I have become very knowledgeable. So please give me. No. I've become very old. There is no capacity in me to enjoy the senses anymore. So I'm taking your shelter. So a person who is intelligent that Krishna tells. He immediately picks up the knowledge which Krishna is telling to Arjuna. And he becomes the Mahatma. So Krishna declared in verse number three itself. So this knowledge I'm going to explain. I am father, I am mother. I am the butter. I am fire. I am all the personalities of this world. I am all the ingredients. So those people who understand this knowledge they worship me, chant my name. They become Mahatma. Their lives become successful. They become full of happiness. But Ashrad, Dudhana, Purusha those people who are not able to put faith aprapimam nivartante they are not able to attain me. Keep on coming in this cycle. Keep falling in this birth and death repeatedly. So ultimate destination is Krishna only so slowly the Vedas they let you follow Karmakanda. After attaining all the material results you'll be dissatisfied. But faith in the Vedas would be established so very easily. Then you can read Vedas further. You come to gyanakanda? You understand logically. Analyze slowly. That Krishna vasudevam sarmamiti samahatma sudhurlaba bahunam janmanamante gyan mam Prapadhyante after many, many births, Gyani understands everything is Vasudev There is nothing but vasudev in this world. Such gyani is very rare. And then he also surrenders unto me. He becomes Mahatma. Another person who is wise. He understands. A teacher is telling me. A teacher is very authorized. Let me take advantage of this knowledge. Anyway I have to surrender to Krishna after many many lives. Let me now surrender immediately. He immediately becomes successful. He is able to avoid all such burning of heart rather than himself tasting cyanide and understanding it is poison. I'm dying now understand from authority cyanide is poison. Do not take. Do not surrender to process of Gyana and Karma. Take to Bhakti process directly. Anybody who has taken, he has become successful. Anybody who has not taken, he has not become successful. And Prabhupada tells you can understand for yourself. There is proof. When people ask how we can understand, I do not see Krishna. So Prabhupada tells why you are putting so much stress on seeing? Prabhupada gives very nice. Actually sometimes when we are very Tamsik Rajasik we don't appreciate Prabhupada's examples. We think these examples are not logical enough. But Prabhupada's examples are so highly full of logic, most nice. So Prabhupada gives example of mango. He tells mango just like you are seeing by looking at mango can you realize mango, this is real mango. This is nice mango. No, by looking you cannot. By touching you cannot. But as soon as you taste then you understand oh this is mango, this is very nice. So this is the proof. Proof of the pudding is in eating it. So when you taste mango, then you understand oh it is mango. Otherwise it could be plastic, it could be something else, some imitation. But when you taste it then you understand oh this is mango, this is proof. In a similar fashion, why you are putting so much stress on your eyes? When with your eyes you cannot even figure out what is mango. So tongue by tongue you realize what is mango. In a similar fashion by tongue you will realize what is Krishna. By tongue and by ear, simply keep on chanting and hearing the names of Krishna. Just like tasting mango gives a unique pleasure which you don't find anywhere else. In a similar fashion we'll find a unique pleasure which we have not found anywhere else in the material world. It is not the pleasure of watching something beautiful, tasting some nice dish, hearing some nice sound, sex pleasure which is much beyond that that a person realizes by tongue. Simply chant the names of Krishna and hear every sound. Very attentively. By this practical experience we can understand krishna tells Pratyaksh, Avagamam, Dharmyam practically you can understand Krishna. There is no more doubt. So by this strong faith is established in the heart. Just like a person is convinced this is good mango, he understands that this is Krishna. I want this pleasure. For this pleasure I was hankering always. Now I have got this pleasure that we can realize by tongue by chanting Krishna's name. So Krishna this word is very important. Gatti Nati vidu Swartha gatimhe Vishnu. People do not understand that Gatti ultimate destination is Vishnu. Only by attaining Vishnu they will be satisfied in life. Further. Krishna tells Tapami ham hambarsham nigranamiyosrajamicha hamritam chai sadh sachah Marjuna. I control the heat, the rain and the drought. I am immortality. I am also death personified. Both being and non being are in me. Tri, Vidya, Mama, Soma, Pata, Papa, Yajna, Rishtwasvargatim, Prathayante, Te, Punya, Masadhya, Surendra, Lokam, Ashnanti, Divyan, Devi, Deva, Bhogan those who study the vedas and drink the soma juice seeking the heavenly planets worship me indirectly. They take birth on the planet of Indra where they enjoy Godly delights. So he's telling, what is the destination of these people who don't surrender unto me? So they follow the Vedic processes and they worship other devi devtas. So Krishna is telling they worship Me, but indirectly. Just like if you are putting food on the head of some person or in the nose of some person, you are feeding the person, but in an improper way. That Krishna will explain in the coming verses they are worshipping Me, but an improper way. So what happens to them? Tetam bhuktwa swarga. Lokam Vishalam shane pune Martha. Lokam Vishanti avam tridharmam anuprapana gata Gatam kama kamala bhante. When they have thus enjoyed heavenly sense pleasure, they return to this mortal planet again. Thus, through the Vedic principles, they achieve only flickering happiness. So Krishna is telling those who get trapped in the Vedic rituals, vedic principles of Karmakanda portion, what happens to them? Swargulokam Vishalam for a while they will enjoy very high happiness. Just like when you are eating the food, that time you are blissful. And later because of overeating, you can have dysentery or you have diabetes, you'll have problems and so many other things. But that time you are enjoying. So a diabetic patient, when he eats sweets, he cannot tell I am enjoying. A person who is a knowledge he sees or how this man is creating is suffering in a similar fashion. If for a while you enjoy delight on this planet or on heavenly planets, you cannot tell life is nice, life is good. Life is not good. That very thing will create stress for you in the future. Krishna is telling this is what happens to those people. They go to heavenly planets, shiny, pundyan there, if they don't cultivate Krishna consciousness, then they again fall back to this world. Martya lokam Vishanti. So why people are working so hard, going up and coming down and doing all these things? Because of just two things krishna explains yoga and Kshima. So such hard work is there. People are not surrendering to Krishna because they want to attain something. Thinking that if I attain this, I'll be happy. And Kshema, they think, oh, I have attained some position. I have been getting these many marks. Now if I worship Krishna, I will lose my marks. Or I have got this status, social status. If I worship Krishna, I may lose that status. So thus, for protection of whatever they have and for attaining something which they don't have, people keep on engaging in material desires, material activities and don't surrender to Krishna. So here Krishna gives a golden verse which every even materialist should read. And what is that? Shloka ananyas chintayanto mam yejana pariyu pasate mambaham. But those who worship me with devotion meditating on my transcendental form. To them I carry what they lack and preserve what they have. So Krishna is telling now 1 may wonder, 1 may ask that it's okay if I surrender to you very nicely if I worship you completely without any reservation so then who will take care of me? Who will give me what I need? Who will fulfill my material demands? And who will protect whatever belongings I have? So Krishna is telling do not worry Anyaha. Without any deviation. Prabhupada explains one who is unable to live for a moment without Krishna consciousness cannot but think of Krishna 24 hours. Being engaged in devotional service by hearing, chanting, remembering, offering prayers, worshipping, serving the lotus feet of the Lord rendering other services, cultivating friendship and surrendering fully to the Lord. Such activities are all auspicious and full of spiritual potencies. Indeed they make the devotee perfect in self realization. Then his only desire is to achieve the association of the supreme personality of Godhead. So Prabhupada is explaining those people who are engaged in such a manner in Shravanam Kirtanam, chanting, hearing, serving the lotus feet continuously then somebody may wonder what will happen to them. So Krishna is telling Nithy Abhyuktanam who are always fixed in devotion to me, Yogakshimam Bahamiham I provide what they lack and I preserve what they have. So sometimes when we come to Krishna consciousness still the tinge of fruit of activity remains. We are not completely pure. It is only Gaudy Vaishnavism which is this kind of devotion. This kind of highest path. Even among the Bhakti Yogis is very rarely revealed. And even among the four Sampradayas it is not completely explained. Unless chaitanyama prabhu madhvindra puri. They appeared in the Brahma Sampradaya before this. This was also not revealed very clearly. So usually people worship God to go back to God to go back to Godhead. But Chaitanya Mahaprabhu explained here also there is little contamination of Karmic activities. Karmic activity means you do something for some profit. So now you are doing Bhakti. So that you can go back to Godhead. You can go and live in Vakunthaloka. Enjoy a very nice life. So this is also contamination. You want still your happiness. So real happiness. The highest form of Bhakti is Bilashita Shunyam, Gyanu, Karmadi and avaratam highest devotion is I don't want even to go back to Godhead. I want to remain in whatever situation Krishna keeps me. So sometimes devotees tell when they come to Krishna consciousness. Yes, Prabhu, I've realized this. Karma Ghana. This is bad. I am surrendering to Krishna. I don't want to work hard. Do all these fruit of activities. I am going to settle in Vrindavan and the plots which were many around Radhakund people are purchasing the plots. How many devotees are making house around Radhakund and Govardhan and Vrindavan like so. And we think know my profit. I will live peacefully there and execute Krishna consciousness. And in this way I'll be very satisfied. But actually this is not the best way to satisfy Krishna. Here also there is contamination. Again we are thinking of our own happiness. There is contamination of this Karma activity. So as long as this Karma activity is there in our heart. We cannot actually go and stay in Vrindavan even though we can make our house in Vrindavan. So Vrindavan means spontaneous devotion to Krishna where personal comfort is not at all concerned. So the virajavasis, they don't have desire to go back to Goddess or do anything. They simply want to engage in the service of Krishna. This is the highest form of devotion. And this can be attained when a person has the mercy of the spiritual master. So we have to understand the spiritual realization. Spiritual pleasure. It is given when spiritual master is pleased. When spiritual master is pleased, Krishna is pleased. So when spiritual master is pleased. So we have to read very nicely the mood of the spiritual master, the desires of the spiritual master. So once it so happened that one pastime is there. When Gargmani Prabhu, one of the earliest disciples of Prabhupada. So he shared that he was talking with Prabhupada. And that time there is a discussion that this devotee was preaching in Indonesia, Muslim country and library preaching. There was a party of devotees which was going library to library and they are placing books in all such libraries. So when Prabhupada heard this news he became very happy. Oh Muslim country. Then they spoke of two more devotees who were also preaching in the Muslim countries. So Muslim countries are very tight. They don't allow other religion, other preaching. But still these devotees were going there and preaching. So Prabhupada, when he heard this news he became very happy. And Prabhupada told I take the dust from the lotus feet of the devotees who are preaching in the Muslim countries. And when those devotees who are putting such hard work they heard that they became immediately ecstatic. Oh, this is what is most pleasing to our spiritual master. And Prabhupada became so much pleased that Prabhupada was giving a Pandal program. And Prabhupada was telling we have to preach and this knowledge is there. People are suffering because of this. So one person he challenged Prabhupada, you are preaching here in India. Anyway people are devotees of Krishna. What are you doing? If you have this thing he challenged Prabhupada, then why don't you preach in Pakistan? So Prabhupada told you are challenging us. Yes, we will go to Pakistan. Immediately told his disciples go to Pakistan to preach. And it was 1971 and devotees went there. And as they landed in Pakistan they realized India was on war with Pakistan. At that time they entered Pakistan to preach. And anyway Americans are those white skinned people. And then they are having vaishnav tila deadly combination for those people who are not very agreeable to these features. So they were showing knife to the devotees. There were attempts to kill them, they were spitting on them. And all such torture they went underwent. And then there was news in the newspaper that Hare Krishna devotees killed in Pakistan. And when Prabhupada read the news. He immediately telegrammed that please come back, it's not the right time. And then those devotees were not killed circumstantially fortunately it was some other people. So then the devotees, they came back and it was festival day. And the devotees are fasting from grains. I think it was Ramnami if I remember correctly something. So we are supposed to fast from grains completely. From that time, even from non grains, everybody was fasting. But as soon as they came there, Prabhupada embraced them like a child and immediately ordered a full grain feast to be cooked for them. And Prabhupada fed them. He surpassed all the laws of the Vedas. So this is the mercy of spiritual master. So when a person is having no other desire, I do not want my pleasure, my comfort, I just want to give pleasure to my spiritual master. This is the highest understanding of spiritual life. Then he is a Brahmachary, he's a grahasta, he's a Vanaprasta, he's a business, he's doing anything. Whatever he's doing, he can become Mahatma. So this is the greatest understanding which is recommended here in the Bhagavad Gita which Mahaprabha? We explained that this is real Bhakti. So do not think about your maintenance, do not think about your happiness. Here Krishna is promising spiritually and materially. Never plan your happiness, just plan my happiness. If you live in Vrindavan, you are doing your Bhajan very nicely. That is very good. That is recommended for good advanced devotees. But not for the devotees who want to become super advanced, who want to become really advanced, who want to transfer themselves, who want to serve Krishna personally, who go to golakrindavan for them a different kind. And this is what Chaitanya Mahaprabhu expects. The highest kind of spiritual life we follow. Where there is no personal desire, only desire. There is no thinking about what will I do in my life, what will be my security? I just want to satisfy Krishna and Krishna is satisfied. How we have been discussing many times in Bhagavad Gita, Krishna tells a person who preaches my glory, who spreads this knowledge to others. So here Krishna is promising Ananya Chintoyantamam who is always thinking about me, engaging in my service in this way continuously yoga shamam vaham Yeham yoga means here Prabhupada explains in the Purport this is called Yoga by the mercy of the Lord. Such a devotee never comes back to this material condition of life. Shama refers to the merciful protection of the Lord. So rather than planning our protection oh, here materialist is there, their materialist is there. Let me live safely. Or like that you plan just service of Krishna and then automatically Krishna will give protection. This is the secret. The past time we are discussing the other day when people were expressing lusty desires, Prabhupada told you preach and then you pray to Krishna. Krishna will take this, itching sensation, go away. But what happens without serving Krishna, we directly want to so doing 16 rounds, reading every day, falling sadhana is no big deal that we are doing for ourselves. Again there is karma contamination. What have you done for Krishna? So simply try to do something for Krishna. Then you need not bother. For your protection Krishna gives protection. Shamam. Shamam means protect, I protect. And yoga yoga means the knowledge. How to go back to Krishna, how to connect. Krishna will lay the path everything nicely. When devotees were dancing jumping very enthusiastically in the Mayapur temple Prabhupada told if you do kirtan like this very very nicely then Bhakti Minut Thakur personally will come. He will take you back to Godhead. So does Krishna. The Acharyas personally they will take care if they see that we are just engaged. So this is the secret of spiritual life. Always thinking, engaging yourself in the service of Krishna. So this is spiritual thing connecting to Krishna. And spiritual protection. Protection from material energy which is being discussed here in lectures and in other writings. Prabhupada explains this is true for material domain also. Materially we want something. So thus this is the pastime. So there was one Acharya, Arjuna Acharya. This is what we wrote in that title today. So Arjuna Acharya was very advanced devotee of Krishna. He was writing commentary on the Bhagavad Gita. So when he came across this shloka so the commentary it was written I personally provide what he lacks, what my devotee needs and I protect what he has. So then he thought oh Krishna just see what Krishna is explaining here. Mata Dhata pitamaha. I am Father, I am Mother. I am everything. Everything belongs to Krishna. This is Krishna. Why Krishna has to carry personally to something? Why Krishna will protect personally? So he struck it off and he wrote down there through his energies like that. So when he struck those lines off and then there was need because he was a householder. So there is need to arrange the household essentials. He went out and then somebody knocks on the door. And the wife of Arjun Acharya she opens the door and then she sees two very beautiful children. One fair colored, one dark complexion. And they are carrying very very heavy load on the shoulders on bamboo sticks. This is how they would carry loads on balance. So on that bamboo balance stick lot of load is there on their head on the stick. So she tells so why you are carrying? Who has given you all these things? So they tell actually Acharya your husband only has told us to. He has put us all this load on us. So much load he has put on your children. It is very difficult for you to carry bully. Yes. And when we told we cannot carry he has beaten us also. Just see here and they show the marks on their backs. So they told how Acharya has become so cruel. He has loaded them and then he has. Beaten also. So he tells, okay, please, please come here. Please put it here. Please sit down. I'll bring Prasadam for no, no. We are very scared. Acharya will come and he will chastise us again and then they run away. So usually the Vedic culture is the wife. She offers the husband the food and when everybody in the family has taken, then they take. But here she was taking Prasadam, honoring Prasadam and Arjun Acharya, he returns and then he sees, what is this? I have not taken? But she is honoring why she is violating the etiquette and she tells what happened and she tells how you have become so cruel? Those poor children. You beat them and you put so much load on them. How you have become so cruel told? No, I have not sent anything to the children. And no, you only sent no all these food stuffs, all these items no, this is what we needed. But I could not get all these things. And who has sent this? No you only send these. And she gives the description that these two children they came and then he understood that because I doubted that Krishna does not bring personally krishna and Balram personally came and whatever Acharya was needing arjun Acharya they brought personally to their house. So this is the principle which Krishna wanted to explain yoga. And another important principle which Krishna wanted to convey is the absolute nature of Krishna. Krishna krishna's name, krishna's form Krishna's word. There is no difference. So there is no difference between Krishna and his words in the Bhagavad Gita. So when somebody struck off the words in the Bhagavad Gita, bhagavad Gita is non different from Krishna. So Krishna, he showed the marks on his back. So thus Prabhupada explains Krishna and his words are non different. When I'm reading Bhagavad Gita I should understand I am personally associating with Krishna and if we read Bhagavad Gita with this faith then we'll personally take instructions from Krishna we'll associate and this principle Krishna has applied in many many places Bali Maharaj personally Krishna is standing as guard to Bali Maharaj. When Ramad came simply by the strike of his toe ramana flew off to various miles and then he understood I cannot conquer this Bali Maharaj's kingdom so Krishna, because he got very pleased by Bali Maharaj's sacrifice he is personally standing as guard to his devotee just see, can anybody do the duty of guard? Guard means very low job. But Krishna is doing this job for his devotee. So Krishna is so very much loving to his devotee. Krishna protects materially also. Thus we have never seen people complain of time. Prabhu, I'm chanting 16 rounds. I am doing sadhana. But I'm very busy. And life is very difficult unless a person implements this loca in the life. Always thinking how to serve Krishna, how to preach Krishna consciousness not my benefit. Extending the benefit to others. We have not seen any preacher in difficulty. Preacher always find time. Preacher finds means. Preacher is not just spiritually advancing very nicely. People is not just protected from the material nature's influence materially also they are very very comfortable. Always protected by Krishna. So thus, please keep this instance in mind. Apply this principle in your life. We understand it may not be possible to develop such faith immediately. But in baby steps, few steps try to implement this thing in your life. We have to rise above the personal satisfaction in our life and try to work in the service of Krishna. And then you will see how Krishna personally provides and personally protects also."