"So we discussed very very important, very special words in the previous session. Ananya chintayanto mam ye janaf paryupasate tesham nitya Bhuktanam yogakshimam Bahamiham. So this is the very nice, sublime process of Bhakti yoga. Even if a person is having little sense, not just for spiritual advancement, even for advancement, a person should simply seek favor of Krishna. Because Krishna tells if a person is always thinking about me, engaged in my service, nitya Bhiyuktanam, I provide what he lacks for spiritual advancement, for material comforts and I preserve what he has. So when Krishna wants to take away, then what and how shall we save? And if Krishna wants to give, then who can stop? So that is why this is the most intelligent way for spiritual advancement and for material comforts also. Ananya chintayanto mam ye jana Paryupasate so, although a devotee is not willing to seek any material comforts from Krishna, but still as a matter of love, krishna takes care of his devotees very very nicely. So material life is shadow of spiritual life. If you wish to chase the shadow, you'll only meet with frustration. If you catch the real substance, shadow follows automatically. So now let us see the next verse. As some people had asked the question. So if I am worshipping Krishna, it is very nice. This is the result then ananyah it is told no other deity, no other demigods goddesses, a person should surrender unto or worship. So if I do that, what would be the result? As some people had asked in previous session and prior to that. So let us see what Krishna has got in the answer in the upcoming verse. So this is the version of God Krishna himself. Text number 23. You can see on the screen. So those who worship Krishna with unalloyed devotion, complete surrender. Krishna has explained their destiny. Now those who are worshipping Anya Devata Bhakta whatever a man may sacrifice to other Gods, o Son of Kunti is really meant for me alone. But it is offered without true understanding. Srila Prabhupada explains persons who are engaged in the worship of demigods are not very intelligent. Although such worship is done to me indirectly. Krishna says how to understand the statement? Very nice example we have discussed many times when a man pours water on the leaves and branches of a tree without pouring water on the root, he does so without sufficient knowledge or without observing regulative principles. Similarly, the process of rendering service to different parts of the body is to supply food to the stomach. The demigods are, so to speak, different officers and directors. In the government of the Supreme Lord, one has to follow the laws made by the government, not by the officers or directors. Similarly, everyone is to offer his worship to the Supreme Lord only. That will automatically satisfy the different officers and directors of the Lord. The officers and directors are engaged as representatives of the government and to offer some bribe. So very important word is mentioned here. To offer some bribe to the officers and directors is illegal. This is stated here as avidi purvakam. In other words, Krishna does not approve the unnecessary worship of the demigods. So demigods are part and parcels of the universal body of Krishna. As we discussed, those who are Mahatma in the qualities of Great Soul session Mahatma, Nastumam, Partha, Daivim, Prakatvim, Ashwitah so they directly surrender unto Krishna, worship him. And those who are not Mahatmas, they fall in various categories. And one such category is bahuda vishwato mukham. Those who worship the universal form of Krishna. This universe, all the forms that we see around us just like in our body there are various germs bacteria and every cell is also a living entity. But they are all dependent upon us. As soon as we are out of the body then all those living entities can also not have independent existence. In a similar fashion, when Lord Krishna is not there in this universe no forms in the universe can exist. No individual souls can have any form. So the universal body of Krishna has got many many other forms. The forms of demigods. So when a person is worshipping demigods he is worshipping Krishna only. But in an improper way. Not in the proper understanding. So that is why Krishna is not approving here. It is ignorance. If a person is willing to serve the tree but is putting water on the leaves and branches instead of putting on the root, then that is called ignorance. That will not satisfy the tree. That is why Lord Krishna has mentioned in 7th chapter also those who wish to have detailed information can go to the podcast and hear worshipping demigods. There is a session. The Science of worshipping demigods. So in that chapter seven, verse number 20 through 23 lord Krishna has again described the position of demigod Devda worshippers which is very very prevalent in our country. So Krishna tells Tad Bhavati. Albame the Sam, those people are less intelligent. Kama, Is, Taista, Rita, Gana, Prapadhyanthiya Devatah those people whose intelligence is stolen by material desires kamai various material desires prapadhyante they surrender Anya Devatah to other Devatas. So we all understand why do we worship Devi Devatas? We really love them. We just want to serve them without any exchange. No, we want something. That is why we approach particular demigod. So when the intelligence is stolen away by material desires then a person goes to other demigods. So actually demigods cannot do any favor. In one's life, one's destiny is fixed. As soon as a person takes birth, happiness and distress is fixed in one's life. No amount of endeavor can change that happiness or distress. But yes, it can be preponed or postponed. So something which is not due to you at this time and Krishna has arranged laws of nature. You just follow the right path and automatically the results would come to you. And the right path is why this different Varnashrama? All these Vedic knowledge, why it is given to us? Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita 15 chapter veda Sarvar ham ava Vedio from all the Vedas ultimately I am to be known. But when a person gets bewildered, he gets very greedy for material desires. Oh, I want it somehow. Then his intelligence is stolen. Why intelligence is stolen? He does not understand. If I am following, if I am worshipping Krishna then whatever is good for me will come automatically. Krishna has made the laws of nature. Good things, bad things will come to me. So when a person is not able to understand because he's very greedy, very lusty then he takes shelter of Demigods. He wants to bribe them. Some favor will happen automatically as per the laws of government. Just like now. Some people want some beds in the hospital or they want something then they are bribing. So somebody called us devotees. That prabhu. Is it possible? If you have any connection, can we get that vaccine somehow or not? Vaccine, that medicine, REM disability, something. So then we asked one devotee doctor who's in touch with us. So they told yes it is possible. But in black it is possible. You have to pay four or five times the amount. So in this way when the system is there, the arrangement is there by the government. But if you want something out of system then you bribe the officers who are in charge of distributing that. Now if that officer helps, you are implicated. And he is also implicated. So this is the way of devata worship demigod worship. If the Demigods are definitely in charge of distributing various facilities for us. But if we worship the Demigods then we are not depending upon the laws made by Krishna. And if we receive some help then we are implicated. This called illegal exchange. And the Demigods are also implicated. So that is why Krishna is telling Alpama Dasam tad bhavati. Alpama Dasa. Less intelligent people worship the demigods. And anyway, whatever results they get from Demigods, the entire Vedic system, Varnashrama system is made to give us eternal benefit. Because we are eternal. Somebody gives you a house for your entire life. Somebody gives for a few months. What is the need of getting something for a short time? Then we'll be out on the road. This is what happens. Demigods may sanction you something which was anyway you were supposed to get as per your destiny. It was supposed to come to you but out of order. I want something. Then in future I will be having nothing. Similarly there is tapasya recommended in the Vedas. You are going to suffer in future. But you do tapasya, you do fasting, you do parikrama, you do something. And you will have some suffering in that course. So we would have suffered from rigorous disease in future and pain would have come to us. But now that pain we have taken voluntarily we would have become poverty stricken and no food be there. Food would be there for us. But now if you do fasting that thing is taken care. So this is a purpose behind. Of course this is not our motive of a Krishna conscious person that I want to avoid some misery. Devotee is willing to take all comforts and all miseries for the service of Krishna. So when Devotee is fasting he is not doing that. He is fasting simply to please Krishna. Because it's Krishna's Prabhupada's spiritual master's instruction. Because of this bodily concept of life I'm not able to serve Krishna. And I have to spend so much of time taking care of the body, feeding it and this thing it takes 2 hours. 3 hours. So no cooking that day? No nothing that day. And just chanting entire day very nicely in the service of Krishna. So then that is very nice. Then I can focus on my chanting and if I fast then chanting it helps in chanting very nicely. So just to save time and to improve the quality of my devotional activities. And then I get in bodily concept because of sense enjoyment. So I want to come out of bodily concept. The more I do tapasya the more I realize how I am not the body the more I indulge in addiction which we call enjoyment. It is nothing but addiction. We don't need it. But there is hankering in our life. Because we are not having love of Krishna in our life. So that is why we get addicted to material enjoyment. The more we enjoy the senses the more we get baffled and we think I am this body. So just to come out of bodily concept of life to serve Krishna for his pleasure I do fasting. So I come out of bodily concept and I save time. This is our mood but general understanding. So people do tapasya so that they can avoid the discomforts which are going to come in future. In this way happiness distress of life is fixed. You can pre PWN or postpone it. So Devtas can anyway not change anybody's destiny. Everything is going to come as per the laws of karma. So this bribery business no intelligent man is supposed to engage himself. And they are actually offering to Krishna only. Whatever results the demigods are bestowing upon anybody. Those benefits are also given by Krishna only as Krishna has mentioned in the 7th chapter. But a foolish person is not able to understand. Just like we discussed in the previous session the postman is bringing money now. A foolish man can think of postman is so nice. Postman brings me money every month. This is how money orders would be delivered. But you don't understand. Your father only is giving. So you should be grateful to your father and not the postman. A person who expresses all the gratefulness to the postman fights with the Father, what have you given? That is called ignorance. So thus Krishna is not recommending devata demigod worship over here. Why? Krishna explains ahamhi sarva yagyanam Bhokta chapura NATUMA mahijanati tatva natash chavantite I am the only enjoyer aham hisarva Yajnam so various Yajnas have been described here. People perform that of course now people do not do that. Earlier people were knowing this is the process for elevation to higher planets of greater comforts. So Krishna is telling ahami sarva yogya yajnanam Bhokta cha prabhur evacha I am the only enjoyer and the only object of sacrifice. So just like somebody may come to collect penalty from you, fine from you or tax from you, ultimately everything goes to the king. So this is the role of tax collectors, toll collectors, so many collectors are there and so much money, so much tax we have to give at every venue. But ultimately where is the tax going? Tax is going to the government. So king would engage many, many people and they can take their share, but ultimately it goes to the king. So in that way, the ultimate object of all the Yajnas that we are doing, it could be any other devtas, could be involved. But ultimate enjoy is Krishna only ahami sarva Yajnam Bhukta cha prabhuravacha. Those who do not recognize my transcendental nature fall down now those who don't understand that Krishna is ultimate object, then they fall down. Fall down means they may be going to other planets, higher planets also. But then they lose everything and come back again to this material world. So you worked very hard, you were there on the street, you became a rich man and again you came on the street. So what is the need of putting such endeavor? You should put such endeavor that you should always remain rich. So Krishna tells those people don't understand that Krishna is the ultimate prabhu. Krishna is the ultimate master. Those people fall down. So this is our understanding now in material world that I am prabhu, I am master, I want to enjoy directly. This is the cause of all the problems in our life. So that is why Bhagavad Gita covers five topics. So topic is the Absolute Truth supreme Personality of Godhead. And another topic is Prakriti. Prakriti means nature. So we are also prakriti of Krishna. We are marginal potency. So purusha means Krishna, the enjoyer God and prakriti means the Energy of God which is supposed to be enjoyed by God. Prakriti engages itself in the service of purush. So this is how the Vedic culture would run. Purusha means the man, the husband and prakriti means the wife. The wife follows the instructions of the husband and participates in the activities in giving pleasure to the husband. And then the husband and wife both enjoy equally. But the husband is predominator in the relationship. So now people do not understand this arrangement and they want to create equality. Husband is also equal. Wife is also equal. So for some time it may be very appealing. Oh, this is very nice. I am getting equality. But Prabhupada's women don't understand that how they are getting exploited in the name. Of this empowerment or enjoyment. Now the poor woman is having the charge of raising the child also and serving the husband also. And then there is so much of office work also. So this extra burden has fallen an. Exploitation anyway, it was happening in the house if at all the husband is not trained properly otherwise there is no question now it is happening in the office now because the men, they want to associate with women so just to facilitate their enjoyment this system has been created and the burden has fallen upon the women. So that is why somebody has done very nice survey women before doing jobs and after doing job. So after doing job the stress has increased like anything of women and this is not a small survey, it's of many many years for decades they have done the survey. So after job have women become more happy? Happier? No, that is not fact. So this is the analysis. The data speaks it all. So thus, just like in a company, you have a boss and there is employee, there is employer. So employer is the predominator in the relationship. Employer will dictate you please do this, do this activity. Next you do this and then the employee participates. But both of them enjoy. The employee is also very, very eager to render services to the employer. He becomes very happy when he finds the service of an employer, of a right employer. But it is not that they are both equal. As soon as there is equality, then there is chaos. Thus God has not created anybody equal on this planet. Nobody is equal. As soon as there is equality, then there is fight, then there is greater anxiety. So if one person acquires a position of predominator and predominated if the employee follows very nicely the instructions of employer both of them will enjoy. So this is the nature now we want to whatever we see I want to enjoy any food item I see oh, if I eat it, it will be so nice any person I see of these people engage in my service it is so nice. If these people follow me, it is very nice. Anything. If I get some musical instrument or if I can please my ears it will be very nice. Songs. Oh, somebody can sing songs for me it will be very nice. So I want to become center of attraction. If people praise me, it will be very nice. I want to become prabhu. I want to become master. And when a person gets this master tendency then that is a cause of all problems in one's life. Because by nature we are prakriti. We are employee. We want to become employer. No employee feels very happy in the service of right employer. Similarly, we have to understand. We have to employ ourselves. We are prakriti in the service of prabhu. We are not Prabhu's. We are prakritis. So simply if anything, rather than developing desire to enjoy directly we engage in the service of Krishna. Prano, pahara chayathi indriyanam. If the indriyas decide yes, I don't want to enjoy directly the foodstuffs I want to give to stomach Indrias would automatically be satisfied. So just Prabhupada. Experience this in your life. Even without understanding it is done. You will experience even if you do not understand the meaning of Hare Krishna Mahamantra chant you are traveling, you are walking. You are moving around. You are eating in between. Any time when there is time, chant this mantra. Hare Krishna. Hare Krishna, krishna Krishna, hare Hare, hare Ram, hare Ram, ram Ram, hare Hare and you will feel transcendental pleasure. You engage your senses, your resources in service of Krishna. You will feel transcendental pleasure in your life. So those people who do that they enjoy this pleasure. And this is the practical proof that we are actually by nature prakriti. So this is how we should train our consciousness. Now whatever I see, I should engage in the service of Krishna. So this whole world belongs to Krishna. I have come here. All the resources also belong to Krishna. If I am sitting on some resources cashier is sitting on some amount of money. If he thinks all this money belongs to me then that is foolishness. In a similar fashion we should understand that Krishna is the enjoyer whatever resources I have, whatever senses I have, capacity I have it should be used for Krishna's satisfaction. Then the cashier will get promotion and he will enjoy directly. If we try to enjoy the resources which are given to us which belong to God actually to be employed in his service then that will create misery in our life. So this word prabhu is very very important. So those who don't understand that Krishna is prabhu. Those who want to enjoy directly forgetting Krishna then they fall down. How muchEVER they can advance in their life. You can become the richest businessman. You can become president, prime minister. You fall down and then you become animal. Then what is the use of such advancement? Next Krishna tells yanti Devavrata devan pitran Yanti Prattvrata bhutani Bhutajya Yanti madhyajinopimam those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods. Those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings. Bhutaniyanti Bhutajya those who worship ancestors pitran Yanti pitravata go to the ancestors madhyajino Piyantima those who worship me will live with me. So this is the system. So Krishna has created this world. Whatever you desire, that would be fulfilled. So if people worship demigods they are directed towards their object of attachment. They go to the planets of the demigods. Some people worship ghosts and spirits. So when a person is very tamsik he just wants to destroy others. So all these black arts and black magic worshipping pishachas, Rakshas, Yakshas this is mentioned in the Vedas. So their main aim of such worship is to destroy their objects of envy. That could be some family member people are envious among the families. It happens a lot. Especially many many villages where people are tam sick in villages of Rajasthan, in Bengal and many other places. So this black art, black magic is practiced. So they want to make you sick, they want to make you haunted. So such people worship ghosts. And what is the result? By worshipping ghosts they also become ghosts and suffer. Some people worship pitras. They are very much attached to family members. You must be seeing. They worship their forefathers, they have their photos, they offer everything. And even before that and sometimes they descend and they help them also. So some people worship ancestors. So they go to the ancestors. If you want to live with ancestors there is facility in Pittraloka, the planet of Yamraj where he awards decides punishment for the criminals as per the laws of nature there live ancestors also and they live there as long as there is pindadan happening here. And they have a very very long life there. One day there is equal to one month on this planet. So that is why if you want to live with your ancestors there is facility for a long time you can stay with your family members. If you perform suitable activities and worship them you go to them on the pithraloka and those who worship me will live with me. But what happens all these people wherever they are going if they don't surrender to Krishna understand he is the prabhu then ultimately they fall down from their positions. But those who are wise, those who worship Krishna they will live with Krishna. Now, krishna's Planet is eternal. Krishna is eternal. So a person also gets eternal life. He does not die. No disease, no old age and no death. So how to worship Krishna? So worshipping demigods. Krishna has told the very very difficult processes. Even if there is little mistake then a person will not be able to get the result. So lot of tapasya, lot of resources are required to satisfy the demigods. So worship of Krishna however is very very easy. How to worship Krishna? Very I don't have money for such costly yajnas and doing so much of sacrifices. So Krishna is telling very simple process here. Just see what you are getting is eternal life. Life free of anxiety. Vakunta Loka even if you go to Devatas there are disturbance. Sometimes the Dhanavas will attack and so many other things are there complications. They happen there also. But on Krishna Loka it is vakuntha. There is no anxiety. Just imagine a life without any anxiety, without any fatigue, without any disease, without any old age. So that happens when you live with Krishna. Oh so very extraordinary worship would be required. No? Krishna is telling very simple process how to worship me. Patram pushpam falamto yam yome bhaktiya prayachati tadaham bhakti upahritam ashnami prayatmanah ivan offers me with love and devotion Bhaktiya prayachati a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will accept it. Ashnami prayat Atman ashnami means accept. Ashnami means to eat. So here Krishna is telling it is very very simple. Even the poorest of the poor man can also worship me. How simply you are very poor. You don't have many gorgeous arrangements. Patram a leaf you can offer. So generally Krishna is very much pleased by Tulsi leaf. Tulsi is very dear devotee of Krishna. So that is why on every food item whichever we offer to Krishna or liquid or water we put one leaf of Tulsi. And simply by circumambulating tulsi every day. Simply by putting water in tulsi a person very much advances in devotional service. So all of you who are not yet into Tulsi worship, please start it. It is very easy and just don't cut it. Don't prune it. Just offer nicely little water every day. Offer some incense, flowers if you can offer and then you circumambulate it minimum three times every day. Morning, evening you can do. Or at least once in a day you can do so then tremendous advancement a person makes simply by this. So. But if Tulsi leaf is not there any other leaf also Krishna will accept. But Tulsi is very very dear to Krishna. So Krishna is telling you can get leaves anywhere. You offer me a leaf and flowers you get anywhere and you can plant flowers in your own house. It is very simple. Offer some flower to me. Fruits, they are available everywhere in every country. Offer fruit to me or nothing is there water is there at least? So please offer me water. And Krishna is telling I will accept it. Ashnami now this shloka is very difficult to digest. For the impersonalists who are telling that Krishna is not having any form, krishna is not a person. But here direct word is used Ashnami. Ashnami means I eat. So how an energy can eat and please do not take any other meaning out of it. Dictionary meaning should be taken. Ashnami means I accept. An energy cannot accept. If you offer water, if you offer leaf, flower, fruits to energy, it cannot accept, it cannot eat. So Krishna is directly telling I eat, I accept. So God is a person. How he's eating now his eating can be different. His eating is different actually. So Krishna can eat. Krishna can eat simply by looking at the food. That is a special feature of Krishna's body. Krishna can taste the food directly by hearing the prayers which we offer at the time of offering the foodstuffs. Or practically he can consume also. So this is the power of Krishna's senses. By touching, by smelling, by hearing or by watching or by actually tasting. Krishna can eat the food stuffs. So Krishna is eating anyway if you are offering but the condition is although these simple things you are doing it should be done in Bhakti bhaktiya prayachati. So this Bhakti is very very important. So Krishna is not in dearth of any food items or anything else. Krishna wants that we develop. Krishna is concerned about us. Krishna can generate unlimited servants by the flick of his finger. But Krishna wants us to offer so that we develop love for Krishna. And it is this love which we are seeking in our life, love of Krishna that will satisfy us. So thus Krishna is telling I will accept only if you offer these things with love. What is love? We have experience in human form of life. The tremendous attachment that we feel. Although that is not love. Later we realize everybody's self interested. But we have some experience. What is that feeling when we want to sacrifice ourselves for some other person? So that feeling if you have for Krishna that attachment that always you are thinking of Krishna. Krishna's benefit, that is called love. But then who has that feeling? Who has that love for Krishna that he is very very eager to see Krishna, eager to meet Krishna. Sometimes when I need something I go to temple or as a matter of discipline now I've been going always if I don't go now Krishna will become angry. So let me continue my offering, continue my visiting temple, ringing the bell. So either out of fear that God may become angry if I stop worshipping or out of matter of duty or discipline I go. But who has got that love? Just let we are very very eager to meet the object of our love in a similar fashion who is eager or let me go and see Krishna now when morning will happen when the curtains will open and I will have darshan of Krishna again where is that eagerness? So thus without eagerness we cannot satisfy Krishna. Krishna will not accept our offerings. Oh it is very difficult then. So Patram, Pushpam, Falam, Toyam also becomes very difficult if offered without love. So what is the solution? So Krishna gives solutions. We will come to it in the coming verses. Then Krishna is telling yat karushi Adashnashi, yadjuhoshi Dadasiyat, yatta Pasyasi Kante. So Krishna's service is very very easy. Yat Karushi this is a perfection of karma. Yoga with Krishna is telling here all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give away as well as all austerities that you may perform should be done as an offering unto me. So this is what Krishna demands. All the activities that you are doing we are having inclination to do certain kind of activity. Somebody would be inclined to study technology. Somebody would be inclined to study medicine. Somebody accounts somebody he simply wants to run a business. Somebody is a taxi driver. Somebody is a fruit vendor somebody could be doing something he's a fighter warrior. So whatever activity you are doing, please do that for Krishna. Yat Karoshi so it is very simple. Worshipping Krishna any activity, any inclination should be used for Krishna. Just like Arjuna he was a warrior, he fought for Krishna yadashnashi we will anyway eat anything we have tendency simply if you offer that to Krishna and you eat then that becomes worship of Krishna. It is so easy. And Krishna does not make everything vanish. Also he eats as well as he leaves it for you to eat also that is Krishna's power. So it is very simple. Anyway we have to eat. Simply offer to Krishna and then you eat it. So this is very important actually doing offering to Krishna so as we have seen in the third chapter those who have been hearing, those who have not you can please go back to third chapter and hear that the podcast so it is very important to offer food to Krishna and eat. This is one of the very important elements of devotional service. Actually our body, our brain everything is made up of the food that we eat. If we eat the food which is in rajoguna and tamuguna in Chaitanya Charitamrita it is mentioned vishaya anya kaila malina hai mana vishayera means vishayera is a person who is indulging in sense objects means a materialist vishayera ana kaila malina. Hai. Mana if you accept food in the house or from the materialist, malina means dirty. Mana your mind becomes dirty. Dirty means contaminated by rajoguna and Tamuguna. So these contaminations we cannot see. Just like ordinary person cannot make distinction between clear water and purified water. But we have faith on scientists they have given us water purifier so that water would be getting purified. Although from naked eyes I cannot make any distinction. In a similar fashion naked eyes we cannot make distinction. This is also food. That is also food. What changes happened by offering? No offering has completely spiritualized the food. So food of a materialist is highly contaminated in rajoguna and tamoguna. So our heart, our mind also becomes contaminated. And then what happens? If the mind becomes contaminated in such a way then it is difficult to remember Krishna. As long as there is lust and greed in the heart material desires you cannot always behold the form of Krishna within the heart. And unless we always behold we see the form of Krishna within the heart we cannot become a yogi swarjana although he was fighting tasma surveyshu Kaleshu at all time every moment the instruction of Krishna was ma manusmar Yudhyacha you think of me and you fight. So thinking of Krishna always at every moment this is a principle of yoga the yogi because he has no love he has to be away from all the distractions and then he has to focus imagine the form of Krishna within the heart. But a devotee. Because he has tremendous love for Krishna. He cannot forget. Just like a soldier fighting on the border he is always thinking about his wife and children back home. In a similar fashion a person who has love he can remember Krishna always without any deviation. But if the heart is contaminated by Rajaguna and Tamuguna we will not be able to think of Krishna. And if we are not able to think of Krishna there is no happiness, there is no peace, no tranquility in one's life. So that is why prohibited to accept food from a materialist. Food should be always accepted from the devotees. So giving food, accepting food, these dealings should be there among the devotees. So offering is very very important item. So Krishna tells if a person is not offering food unto me then every morsel he is doing agam Papam bhunjante Tetwagham Papam ye pachanti atmakaranath a person who is just cooking for himself he is doing immense sinful activity. So offering of food is very very important element if he wish to advance in spiritual life. So such food is purified. We don't get any sense. And that generates fine tissues in the brain it is told. So this body is also very important in human body and with good brain we can understand spiritual life. So for good brain this prasadam is very important. It builds fine tissues in the brain by which we can comprehend spiritual subject matter. And Prabhupada also recommends milk is also very important. So drinking milk that also builds fine tissues in the brain. Fine intelligence. So there are different kinds of intelligence. If you eat meat you can become materially maybe intelligent but spiritually you become dumb. A meat eater cannot understand God consciousness. And a person who is drinking milk, that is very important for building fine tissues in the brain by which we can understand these concepts very very easily. So Krishna is telling yadashnashi you have tendency of eating simply offer that food to me and then you become worshipper of Krishna. It is so easy. So just offer keep the food in front of Krishna and then you take it. Of course that should be vegetarian. As Krishna has told Patram pushpam falam Toyam krishna is not telling non vegetarian food. So offer vegetarian food without onion, garlic in front of Krishna. You keep with the leaf of tulsi and take out after 510 minutes yad juhoshi Yaddasiyat you do some Yagya, some sacrifice you do it for Krishna. Dadasi every man is willing to do some charity. Almost everybody has this disposition. So the charities also should be done for Krishna. Krishna is telling and Tapasya you are doing any hard work, voluntary discomfort you are taking that discomfort also should be there in the service of Krishna. That is why we do Ekadashivaratha and other fastings. In this way Krishna worship is performed. And then what happens if I worship like this Krishna? Whatever we are doing whatever we are eating whatever we are offering. We are austerities that we are doing, we are doing for Krishna. What is the result? Shubha shubhu Falai reva moksha say karma bandhana sanyasa yoga yuktathma vimukto mamupaishasi so this is called the real benefit. Real achievements of one's life. Very important translation. In this way you will be freed from all reactions to good and evil deeds. And by this principle of renunciation you will be liberated and come to me. So generally people think I should do good deeds and I should not do bad deeds. So Krishna has told previously in second chapter and after that now again Krishna is repeating in this chapter. A person should not do good activity and bad activity also a person should rid himself of the results of both activities good and bad. So this is very different understanding. And nobody has told us, taught us this all the while we should be a good man. They tell and you should not be a bad man. So it is told no, we don't want to be a good man. We don't want to be a bad man. We simply want to please Krishna. And if Krishna is pleased then Krishna does special favor. And what is that special favor? Vimukto mam upaishyasi. A person becomes liberated and he goes to Krishna, gets eternal life. This is the favor. So there is very nice instance in Mahabharat. So Narad Muni is asking Krishna in a sarcastic manner because he's such an elevated devotee he can talk to Krishna in such a manner. So Krishna very nice it is happening with your devotees. So these Pandavas, poor fellows they have nothing else in life but you. They have no other shelter. They are just completely devoted to you. And just see how nice their life is. Their father passed away, their kingdom also was taken away. Their wife was attempted to be disrobed. They were given poison. And so many other threats they have made and they are wandering in jungle. So nice. Such nice favor you have done to them. And their only fault is that they are your devotees. So then Krishna explains very nice verse. Very very nice verse. Krishna tells. So first of all we understood that if we have to attain any material benefits also we should not worship demigods. Because they can only bestow what is there in our destiny. And anyway that is temporary. Whatever we attain. So beyond destiny we cannot attain. But if you worship Krishna then Krishna's favor is not controlled by the laws of nature. Even if something is not there in the destiny Krishna can bestow that upon the devotee. So if a person has any material desires he is even approached Akamu Sarvakamu. That is why Bhagavata mentions Akamas Sarvakamu mokshakamu Dharadhi, you are having no desire. Akamaha means you are a devotee. Devotee has no desire. Sarvakama, I want so many things. I have all material desires or Mokshakama I have desire to get liberation. It is told there is only one recommendation given to all of you. And what is that recommendation? The supreme person. Who is that supreme person? It is mentioned here. Supreme person is not any Devata. Not even Lord Brahma. Not even Lord Shiva. The vedas mentioned. Yastu Narayanam Devam Brahm Rudradi daivitai Samathwe Naya Viksheta Sapashandi Bhavedruvam If a person thinks Brahm, Rudradi, Brahma or Rudra also he thinks what to speak of other? Some ignorant people, they tell oh same God is having different features. And some people artificially try to explain the superiority and the ever encompassing nature of Sanatana Dharma. You want to worship God as mother, then you worship Durga. You are allowed. You want to worship God in some other way. There is Ganesha. It is allowed. You want to worship God as in other forms. So Shiva, Surya, you can take any form. These are all different forms of God. So what to speak of these other forms which are less powerful? The most powerful personality brahma and Shiva. Yes. To Narayanam. Devam one who equates narayana with Brahma and even Shiva brahmarudradhri daivitai Samath venava. He establishes equality of Narayan with Brahma and Shiva Sapashandi. He is called an atheist bhavem, he is definitely a Parampurush, is always Krishna, he's always Narayan. So even if you have material desires, the wisdom given in Bhagavatam, the conclusion of all Vedic knowledge is you should engage in the service of yajeta Purusha, Param. But how? You have to worship Tiv Vrena Bhakti yogaina. If you worship very very nicely, do satisfy all the Devtas very nicely. And this thing maximum by following the laws of nature. You can go to the post of Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma is the most pious living entity of the universe. But there was a boy who had a strange desire which was not even to attain a position which was not attained even by Lord Brahma. Now this is difficult. Brahma is having the topmost position of the universe. He is as powerful as Lord Vishnu. And you want a position which is higher than Lord Brahma. And being a kid, Dhru Maharaj somehow desired that. And he was guided you worship Lord Narayan for any benefit. He's supposed to be approached. Dhruv Maharaj's mother told him event. He desired that. Of course, when a person worships Krishna, somehow he becomes purified of desires. But Krishna being very merciful, he knows the heart and he satisfies. So Dhruv Maharaj was given a position which is not attainable by any laws of nature. He was given the rule of polestar. He was given the rule where Krishna personally lives on that planet where only the eternally liberated living entities, associates of Krishna are supposed to live. And Dhru Maharaj was given the position. Although Krishna predominates all such planets where he's personally living. But Dhru Maharaj was made the king of that planet. He was made the predominator. So this special favor was given by krishna to Dhru Maharaj. Thus if a person has even if he is very blind he cannot depend upon Krishna. You have material desires still thieve Virena Bhakti yogaina. Not Lukewarm bhakti yoga. Thieve Virena intense bhakti yoga. You do and satisfy Krishna. And then Krishna will bestow benefits. So Krishna normally satisfies if a devotee is there, you worship Krishna. Krishna will give opulence which cannot be attained by laws of nature. It is not there in destiny. Still a person will get. However, if the person the devotee is sincere then an advanced favor is given to such a devotee. And what is that krishna tells my first installment of my actual favor is Yasyaham ANU Granami. If I really become merciful upon some devotee then I give him favor. Real favor. And what is that? Harishe, Tadhanam Shanahe I take away all their wealth all that opulence that they have in their life. And thus please do not think Pandavas are not favored by me. The Pandavas are actually having my real favor because they are sincere devotees. So I've taken away all their opulence and I brought them to the street in the jungle. So what happens when a person is bereft of all the opulence? Then a person he wakes up to the reality of this world oh, nobody cares for me. My husband and wife they have become my husband or wife because of my material opulences. Because I had a face which was appealing or which was not very repellent or I had some profile and I had some bank balance. I had some career which was satisfying to the other person. That is why we are having these relationships. And all such relationships are there because of some material opulence. If the material opulence goes away from the life, nobody cares. And then the person becomes completely dependent upon Krishna. So if a person remains dependent upon any living entity in this material world then that is great cheating. Because any living entity he cannot help himself. He himself is suffering. He is in misery. The Devas are crying. They shout. Then even brahma. When he was chased by the homosexual demons it is mentioned in Bhagavatam he ran to the shelter of Krishna. And when Lord Shiva also was chased by Bhasma, suri also sought help of Krishna. So ultimately everybody is somehow they are fraught with various anxieties in this world. So how the worshipper can get any satisfaction in the life. So there is no need of worshipping the devta's offering bribe. But yes, we respect everybody. A person will go if some policeman is standing, I will follow him, I will respect him. But there is no need of worshipping a policeman. Because you understand, you are already worshipping the supreme person. So the devotee offers all respects to all demigods. They are associates, they are directors. They are helping Krishna in his activities. But there is no need to offer worship to them. So when a devotee worships Krishna then he gets this special favor. What is a special favor? So Prabhupada tells from his life. So in 10th Kanto this verse is there seven. Prabhupada told I read this verse then my heart shuddered. Oh my God. Because Prabhupada was a businessman that time. And Prabhupada had buke car. Buke and Chevrolet were only two cars available in India at that time. And Buke was owned by aristocratic people. And Prabhupada had Buke car at that time. Even till recent times, till 90s we are not having cars. Only that ambassador and Fiat was there. So Prabhupada had buke. And Prabhupada business was doing very very nice. So Prabhupada told. Oh, my God. So Krishna will take all my opulence away. And it actually happened. Prabhupada's business started collapsing. Although Prabhupada was destined to become very rich. But then Krishna showed special favor. So Prabhupada told when I was seeing my God brothers so Prabhupada was very sincere. He wanted to serve his guru Maharaj. But he saw my God brothers Sanyasis they are going door to door and begging. Why should I beg? I'll become very rich and by this money I will serve Krishna. But then Krishna had different plans. He made me surrender. He took away all my money. And Krishna forced me to surrender. And even when I was taking Sannyas Prabhupada I was wondering am I doing the right thing? Or I'm bewildered. Or I'm bewildered now. But then I was forced. So this is Krishna's special favor. When everything is taken away, the opulence is taken away. Then the devotee realizes the nature of material world and he becomes completely dependent upon Krishna. So of course Prabhupada's example or Arjuna's example is there. Or what Narad Muni is quoting that Krishna what favor you have shown to devotees? No, they are in all knowledge. All these pastimes are there. So that we can understand the action of Krishna in the life of devotee. If Narad Muni does not ask how can we understand the favor of Krishna that this is real favor. So thus sometimes we may ask material desires. That is why we follow spiritual life. But please understand we should not have any material desires. Rather the real favor given by Krishna is when Krishna takes away all the material opulence. And even though for a while it may appear that the devotee is suffering. Just see there are no family members, no money. But Prabhupada tells. But now you see I have got unlimited money. I came with some Rs40 and now in few years I have 40 crores. So Prabhupada was talking to a businessman. So do you have example of any such business that in few years he has made 40 crores from Rs40. So he told us that is not possible. And Prabhupada told I had few family members but now I have such a big family. Thousands of thousands of disciples and family members. They fight. They are not always agreeable. Even if you serve them, they are not satisfied. But my disciples are completely satisfied with me. And they can do anything for my service. So when Mataji was there, she was very nicely serving Prabhupada and westerner Mataji. And she was serving Prabhupada in I think Radha Dhamodha temple onlyasis would come. So Prabhupada told that she is very dedicated, this disciple of mine. And Prabhupada told if I tell to lay down their life to cut off their head, they will offer their head for my service. And then Prabhupada told, then I can also offer my head for them, for my disciples. So this is the relationship which spiritual master enjoys with the disciples. So apparently when a person is taking sannyas, the comforts of family members is being taken away. But then Prabhupada told now I see I have got such a wonderful and loving family and thousands of family members who care for me like anything. So I've got huge family and so much opulence and so many things are there. So just see. This is Krishna's favor. Bali Maharaj. One devotee was asking me, Prabhu, everything is all right. But please tell me why Krishna did not Krishna cheated Bali Maharaj? Why Krishna cheated Bali Maharaj? So although it may apparently look like cheating and Bali Maharaj is being arrested, thrown into a den and all such things. But later you see, Bali Maharaj's kingdom was made more opulent than Indraloka also. And then although Krishna took away Indra's position from him, the ruler of heaven after this Indra, now he's having more opulence than Indra also. And after this he will actually become Indra after current Indra. And Krishna, apart from this, what did he get? Indra is also disturbed at times by various attacks of demons. But Krishna told, I will stand as guard to you. Nobody will disturb your kingdom. And thus he threw Ravana away when he came to disturb Bali Maharaj. So this is the favor of Krishna. So when a person offers charity to Krishna so sometimes they are thinking, oh, if I give this money, what will happen? So it is mentioned in the vedas if you do charity for Krishna as you may be thinking, oh, whatever I do, it should be for Krishna. Whatever I donate should be for Krishna. Tapasya should be for Krishna. So it is told a person is not at all at loss. We were anyway supposed to suffer in that way. Some disease, some calamity would come. You do tapasya for Krishna, you'll be saved from that. So that money which we offer to Krishna, that money comes back along with the blessings of Krishna. This is the favor of surrendering to Krishna. So thus we should never be afraid by this first installment which Krishna may give to his sincere devotees. So thus Krishna tells my first installment of my seva is yasyaham ANU granami Harishita dhanam Shanahe My first installment is I take away their opulence so that they can become dependent upon me. So this is what happened to the Pandavas. And then another favor was shown to Bhishma. As you saw in the pick of the creative bhishma Deva is also one of the Mahajans and one of the pure devotees of Krishna. And we see that Krishna is acting as an enemy of his devotee. And Krishna caused Bhishma to be killed. So what is this thing? This poor person is your pure devotee. And he has always fought for you. He stood for you when you were being blasphemed in the assembly. And now you have made an arrangement that you have killed him mercilessly. What is this arrangement? So these are the external understandings. The real understanding is Prabhupada mentions that this arrangement was done to show favor to actually Bhishma Deva. This entire arrangement. What is the favor of Bhishma Deva? So Bhishma Deva actually wants to fight with Krishna and wants to serve Krishna in that fighting capacity. So why do we want to fight? Because this tendency is there in Krishna also. So some devotees, they have that relationship with Krishna. They want to satisfy Krishna in that manner. So that is why Krishna was there on the other side of Krishna of Bhishma. And it is told in Bhagavatam when Bhishma was shooting arrows upon Krishna and blood was coming out of Krishna's body. But Krishna was enjoying those shooting of arrows. As if somebody is offering roses on the fleet. Some devotee same pleasure Krishna was getting on being pierced by the arrows of Bhishmadeva. And the example is given another vividly by the Acharyas so Brahmacharys. Of course they should be careful in hearing such examples. Just like a lover they bite their lover. And this biting sometimes it can cause the bleeding also. But such bite is very very pleasant. In a similar fashion although there is apparent bleeding when Bhishma is shooting arrows. This thing is giving tremendous pleasure to Krishna's body. Krishna's body spiritual. And similarly another favor on Kurukshetra, all those crores of people who have died. Some people tell oh Krishna did so much injustice. But that is not injustice, that is favor. Actually all those people would have suffered. But by being killed by Krishna in the presence of Krishna, all of them they got this eternal life. So anyway you have to die. If somebody is making you die immediately and giving you permanent life. Isn't it favor. So thus never get discouraged. Sometimes when we follow Krishna consciousness. Although usually the Krishna keeps the devotees very very comfortable and like that. But some testing times can come especially for the sincere devotees. So don't worry. Understand that this is actually Krishna's favor. Shub Ashub falayar avam. I should not engage in good activities, bad activity, good activities result would be good. Means you get a good body. But body is good or bad. In heavenly planets or hellish planet, birth, death, old age, disease, anxieties will always accompany us. So a person should not engage in good activity or bad activity but should engage in the service of Krishna. In this way will seek favor of Krishna favor can come sometimes in the form of material opulence also then devotee uses opulence in service of Krishna sometimes in material deprivation also krishna used that to become dependent devotee uses that to become dependent upon Krishna so ultimately the actual favor is Mokshase Karma bandhanai. Krishna wants to liberate a person from this Karma bandhana from the results of good as well as bad activities and by attaining freedom from good and bad activities person becomes eternal liberated and this is real favor. So how will this favor happen? If I engage in service of Krishna will one day light come out of Krishna's hand it will fall upon me and then my Karmas would be burned and I'll go back to Godhead. Will Krishna make some external arrangement around me? Will there be some Akashvani or how that favor will come in my life? How Shubhashu Fala reva Moksha say freedom from all these activities will happen? So answer of these questions we will understand it is very important in the next class so now."
