"So Prabhupada told this war is a symptom and the disease is forgetfulness of Krishna. Krishna Bhulia Jeeva Bhogawan Chakari Nikatas Tamayatare japati Adhari so Krishna and Illusion are side by side. Krishna Bhulia as soon as a person forgets Krishna, he comes into illusion immediately. Sun and shadow, they are side by side. Only when there is sun, there is shadow. Because of sun, shadow is created. So in a similar fashion Krishna and Krishna's illusory energy Maya are side by side. As soon as living entity forgets Krishna immediately. What happens immediately comes under the illusion. What is illusion? Sadha Samudvigna Dhiyam Asad Griha this bodily conception of life person starts thinking I am this body. And as soon as he thinks I am this body. Just like people ask how to cope up with the loss of a loved one because people are losing their family members. So this is also symptom. This is also not real problem. So this is what Srila Prabhupada explains in the beginning of Bhagavad Gita sometimes we think oh, we are not compassionate enough. So compassion is actually of two levels as we discussed before in one of the sessions spiritual compassion and material compassion. Spiritual compassion is very much required. That is a sign of a gentleman, a living entity and material compassion. On the other hand it is Srila Prabhupada explains material compassion and lamentation are the signs of ignorance of the spirit soul. Swarjuna was very very compassionate. If I fight this war, all my dear people loved ones would be killed. I do not want to fight. So what is this material compassion? Material compassion means when a person thinks I am this dress, I am this body. And you take some cloth out of this dress and make another cloth. And then you think oh, this is also mine. This is what happens from this body. Another body is produced and we think oh, that belongs to me. So this is a world where people are simply identifying with the clothes, with the external dresses. And if the dress somehow becomes old, it becomes torn. Then people start crying or the person is dead. So should we lament if we see that the dress is getting torn apart? Not at all. Or should we become attached to dress of somebody? Not at all. Because that is simply a dress. But that is what is happening in the world. Because of this illusion, this disease bodily concept of life people start identifying themselves with the dress, developing attachment, desire or aversion hatred towards the dresses. And when the dress is lost, people raise human cry and they become very jubilant when they get some new dress or the dresses fit. Dress is important as long as it is serving the purpose of taking care of the person within so long the dress is important. And sometimes the dress has to be given up. If a person has got trapped in water, sometimes because of dress, he will not be able to swim. So dress is a botheration. If he has got fire, the dress has got fire. Please remove the dress immediately. That is why it is told if a person has committed murder he should be given capital punishment. Because this dress is going to create so much trouble for the living entity. Because this body has become so much contaminated by rajoguna and Tamuguna. Just like the brakes of the car fail it will create great many accidents. So in a similar fashion if a person's body so much in rajoguna and Tamagona that it is now on a killing spree or it has killed somebody it can create great disturbance if it continues to survive. That is why I give capital punishment. Finish the body and such capital punishment. It is told in the manuscripti in the Vedas it is considered compassion on the part of the king. Because that is saving the living entity. But unfortunately now we are thinking oh this capital punishment, this life is all in all. After this the person is finished by mistake he has killed somebody. Give him chance and let him live. Let him continue in this body. They do not know the laws of nature. Now. Anyway the person is Tamsik. Somehow if he does not commit further sinful activities in future he'll suffer like anything. But now if he is given capital punishment he would be relieved so spiritualist. That is why he is always in compassion. But not for the dress. For the living entity. Krishna showed compassion to all those people present on the battlefield which Arjuna also later followed. By killing them. Because they got immediately elevated to permanent life. They got rid of all the diseases. Narad Muni he converted Devatas into trees immediately. Now they were Devatas having mystical body. That body the effect of old age disease is very minimal. And the effect of fatigue and so many other problems that we are fraught with. They don't have such anxieties. They can take any form on their own will. They can desire to manifest, become visible, invisible. They can travel very fast. Many mystic potencies they have got and they got converted to trees who cannot move. So this was not a punishment. This was a mercy. And because of this mercy they also attained their eternal life. They got liberated. So thus when Prabhupada saw in the Mayapur temple that the children they were fighting with the dogs, stray dogs for the remnants of food that people had thrown in the bins. So Prabhupada, he was appalled seeing this sight. What is this happening? These children, how much hungry they would be that they are fighting for the dog, for the remnants of food, for the juta food they are fighting how much hungry a person would be. And Prabhupada became very moved by that. Then he told nobody should be hungry in 10 miles radius of any of our temples. Seeing inspiration from this we started this very big Prasadam distribution program known as Akshay Patra by which we are able to feed 1718 lakh children every day free of cost. So here Prabhupada became compassionate. Because ultimately the living entity was suffering because of the suffering of this external dress. In another instance when Prabhupada was passing by and through around a golf course so Prabhupada asked what is this golf? What do they do? And the disciples explained. So in this way they hit a ball. They sit in a small car and then they reach the other spot again hit the ball. In this way they spend the entire day. And then Prabhupada's eyes were wet again. That how they are wasting this human form of life. This human form of life is an opportunity by which you can get rid of all the symptoms and actual disease also. But they are wasting every moment of this life is so precious. Death can happen anytime. Sensual enjoyment will not be lost every life you'll get the opportunity to enjoy your senses but opportunity to become eternal. To revive your relation with Krishna you will not get. So here the body was in pleasure, the dress was in pleasure. But the soul is going to suffer because of this external pleasure. So this is called spiritual compassion. So now the whole world is just thinking they are suffering from this disease of bodily concept of life. Having a body is not bad. Prabhupada is having a body. Pure devotees have a body. But they are not in bodily concept of life that I am this body. They know this body is my dress, a machine. I use it in the service of Krishna. But thinking that I am body, this is the disease. It happens because of forgetfulness of Krishna. And then whatever happens it is only a symptom. Then we think oh people connected to this body who have similar diseases upon them they belong to me. And then we hanker. We cry for some dresses, for loss of dresses. We cry for getting some new dress. We become happy. And all such things great illusion. So there is no need to cry. There is no need to become happy for the gain or loss of dress. It is as simple as that. So all this emotional drama is simply Anartha. It is not at all required. It happens only because of ignorance of the self. So Prahalad Maharaj told this is the best thing which I have learned. So Prahlad Maharaj summarizes all the problems of the world in just one line. Sadh Samudvigna people are always anxious because Dhiyam Asad grihat they have accepted this temporary body as their own self. Then Prahlad Maharaj doesn't stop here because he's telling what is the best thing which I have learned. So this knowledge is called it's not the best knowledge. It is called confidential. It is great secret. You may keep on wandering across all the literatures. You may be very wise and intelligent. Unless you come across an empowered spiritual authority it is very difficult to comprehend to realize that I am not the body. That is called Brahma bhuta stage. Now we are jeeva bhuta thinking I'm living entity. From there we rise to Brahma bhuta brahma bhuta prasan Natma so what is the symptom that a person has become self realized? I am not the body prasannathma he will always be happy. NA Shochati nakankshati he's out of the cycle of Shochati and Kangshati the jiva living entity conditioned soul. He gets two primary symptoms out of this bodily concept disease and that is Shochati kangshati lamentation is called Shochati kangshati means hankering. So when you get disease just like you have eczema in the body, then you want to itch. This desire comes itching propensity in a similar fashion. Then when you get this body, you start thinking you are the body. Then the senses start itching. Give me this, give me that, give me that. So many demands and these demands push a person very hard. Mind will have demand. You should have status in the society. You should have name and fame. And then you'll be put to lot of hard work morning to evening. You are working very hard and stressed in anxiety results quarter after quarter, exam after exam, monday after Monday. And you are telling what is this life? Entire life I will suffer like this. I'll work like, I'll slog like anything. Yes, a person is forced to slog because of this. Itching sensation hankering sochati Kangshati and when hankering, hankering, hankering you do not get the means to satisfy your riching sensation. Then you get depressed. And when you attain it anyway, you will lose it. Then again you get depressed. Lamentation happens. So then a person is always doing hankering and lamentation. But a person who is liberated, who is Brahma bhuta nasho Chatina Kangshati he's not at all hankering for anything neither he is lamenting for anything. He understands these are not my demands. He's self satisfied. Brahma bhuta prasanat manasho Chatina Kangshati sama surveyshubhut and he sees all living entities on equal platform. He does not misidentify. Here is a dog. Here is cat. Here is snake. Here is wise man. Here is a foolish man. Here is a man, here is a woman. He sees everything different dresses only ultimately everybody is a living is a spirit soul, not the dress. Sama survey Shubhuteshu he sees equality among all living entities. He does not see these living entities belong to me. This set does not belong to me. This is enemy party. This is enemy country. This is dear country. So he does not discriminate like that. He sees everybody as family. Everybody belonging to him. Because we are all part and parcels of God. He feels love for all the living entities. There is no discrimination. Mine and not mine. Family and not family. Everybody is his family. And then when a person is situated on such platform brahma Bhuta platform then this is called confidential most secret knowledge. If a person understands just this thing, realizes this thing not theoretically understanding practical realization he becomes freed from all the anxieties and then he goes to second level of knowledge which is called more confidential. What is more confidential knowledge? So he understands sarvam Kalvedam Brahma there is nothing called matter actually this matter is also spirit. There is only spirit everywhere. Spiritual energy which has transformed into different forms. So the reality is spirit and then more confidential knowledge is this spirit. This energy is coming from an energetic from a person. That person has got a form and that person is living in my heart within the same dress and this is called more secret knowledge. More confidential understanding that I am spirit is not sufficient. The next level of knowledge is the spirit has got a form and the supreme Personality from whom the spirit is emanating he also has got a form but there is a knowledge which is even higher than that. Then he understands there is another form from which all these Parmatma forms present in the heart are expanding and that is called Bhagawan realization. The realization that God is a person and he's situated in his own place and I am meant the highest pleasure of life. If a person simply understands that God is present in my heart his desire is now to merge into the body of that God. But he does not understand the most confidential knowledge which Prahlad Maharaj explains. So if you are suffering from this Shochati Kangshati bodily concept of life prahlad Maharaj tells tasadu Manna Suravariya dehinam Sadh Samud Vignadhiyamasad Grahat, Hitwatmapatam Griham andhupam hitva Atmapatam griham andukupam so this materialistic society which you have built in which you are living my dear father, please leave it immediately. Develop detachment. Because unless you develop detachment it is not possible to enjoy unlimited ecstasy in your life. So that is a hitva Atmapatham this self defeating, self killing materialistic society household life in which you are living hitva please leave it immediately and go. Vanam Gato go to one Vrindavan dadham where Krishna lives and Vanam Gato tad Harim. Ashrayata, take shelter of Hari after going to Sachvana. So this is Prahlad Maharashtra's best teaching which I have learned in my life. So confidential knowledge more confidential most confidential knowledge is the knowledge of devotional service of Krishna. So we need not go through the slow process. There is a slow process also which takes many many lives. Gradually a person realizes one level then second level, then third level but simply if a person has this most confidential knowledge by the association of pure devotees he gets this knowledge somehow he is able to follow then it does not matter. Then Shavadam Kiritanamishnos Maranam Pada the Savannah simply by engaging in devotional service automatically confidential and more confidential knowledge is revealed. Just like if you have $$100.01 is automatically included in that in a similar fashion if you understand most confidential knowledge then the lower platforms of knowledge follow automatically. The liberation follows automatically. The Parmatma realization follows automatically. Many not endeavor for that. And what is the situation of such a person who has got this most confidential knowledge? Now Krishna is concluding this nine chapter of Bhagavad Gita explaining such a position so that you can see on the screen verse number 29 priyaha ye Bhajanti to Mam Bhaktiya maiteshu chapyaham I envy no one nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever renders service unto me in devotion is a friend is in me and I am also a friend to him. So here Krishna tells the extraordinary position of devotee. So Krishna is telling I am equal to everybody. Samoham Sarvo Bhuteshu the problems from which you suffer in this life are your creation only you develop various desires because of disease fulfill those desires without following vedas and thus you commit crimes and thus you suffer because of creating stress for their living entities. But I am equal to everybody. But still we see although Krishna is equal to everyone he favors his devotees sometimes. Just like Pandavas they were always favored. So Krishna was helping them personally by always being with them by helping them with his mystic potencies. When Draupadi was attempted to be disrobed krishna mystically produced unlimited sari. And when again they were in trouble and Durvasamuni reached in the jungle along with his thousands of disciples asking for food and they feared great curse of the sage, powerful sage. Immediately Krishna came, ate a bit of rice which was left in the Akshayapatra, that vessel of Draupadi and again saved the Pandavas from the looming curse. And then they were again Arjun was facing all these great powerful fighters dronacharya bhishma Karna which were much more powerful than Arjun. But all of them got defeated by Krishna. And then when Jarasan was there fighting with them so Krishna gave indication how to kill Jarasant. And also he gave Bhima extra strength so that he can kill Jarasandh in a similar fashion. And like this so many instances are there. And to the extent that Krishna even broke his promise krishna had promised I will not lift any weapon, I will not participate in the war. But when he saw his devotees going to be killed then immediately broke his promise and became an immoral person. Now people don't put faith on Krishna. He has become immoral. He doesn't keep promises. But Krishna told does not matter. Let me become immoral. But Namay Bhakta my devotee cannot be destroyed. I will protect my devotee. So thus Krishna tells although I'm equal to everybody but a very nice word is used here tu in the third line ye Bhajanti tuma bhaktiya tu means but means exception. Although I'm equal to everybody there is one exception Ye Bhajanti. One who knows this most confidential knowledge to Mam Bhaktiya who is my devotee who engages in my service. Mai Teshu chap mai means he lives in me and I also live in him. He is a friend of mine. I am also friend to him. So Srila Prabhupada very beautifully explains that Krishna becomes the devotee of his devotees. As we have seen many times in previous sessions how he renders personally menial services to his devotees. So just imagine, people are struggling with few small things here. And if you take shelter of God, what can be the trouble in your life? And if God becomes your devotee, God is willing to serve you then what is your position? So this is the position of devotee. God becomes devotee of his devotee. That is why Krishna tells please if you want to advance in your spiritual life, worship my devotees. Madh Bhakteshu Pujya Vyadika because Krishna so much regards his devotees that he becomes much more pleased when he sees his devotees being worshipped. That is why we worship spiritual master the best of the all devotees. Mad Bhakteshu Puja Bihadika worship of my devotee is greater than my worship directly. So although a devotee apparently is living in this material world but he does not live in the material world. He is living in Krishna. In Krishna means spiritual world directly in the energy of Krishna. Just like Parmatma is also living within this dress, within this heart. So Parmatma is disturbed by so much blood flowing in our heart or impure blood or Cholesterol or Parmatma is there in the heart of a pig also and pig lives in drains. So does it mean Parmatma swan Mataji asked question to Madhupandit Prabhu that I am very much disturbed how Parmatma is suffering for us. Parmatma is living in the drain in the heart of pig. What reading have you done Mataji? Parmatma is not living in drain Parmatma. Wherever he is there, even though he is in the heart of pig, he always lives in Vakuntha. He lives in another dimension. So thus existence and experience of soul we should not try to fathom on the mundane material platform. So just like Parmatma seated in the heart is always living in Vakuntha, the devotee seated in the heart of this machine is also living with Parmatma always in Vaakuntha. Although apparently this body may be moving, talking, doing some activities in the material world that is happening automatically by the control of Krishna the machine is being taken care maintained by Krishna. Devotee is always in the spiritual world and sometimes such activities are manifest also. Just like the great Acharya is there Narutam das Thakur the Guru Puja song that we sing every day that is composed by Narutam das Thakur. So Narutam Das Thakur was very advanced devotee of Krishna and Narutam Das Thakur was so much dear to Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu once he was doing, he appeared after Chaitanya Mahaprabhu mahaprabhu disappeared by that time so Chaitanya Mahaprabhu once he was dancing, he was absorbed in Kiritan then he started chanting Naru Naru, Narutam, Narutam and such a name was not known. So the devotees asked Mahaprabhu what is this? Whose name are you chanting? So he told no, my great devotee Narutam will come here and he will get love of God as soon as he touches ganges like this he predicted so he was so much dear to Chaitanyma Prabhu. Chaitanima Prabhu was absorbed in the thought of his devotee. So God becomes devotee of his devotee and when Narutam das Thakuri appeared he was always showing the symptoms of great advancement. And usually when we take initiation our spiritual life starts from that day. And as we progress in our spiritual life we understand get the knowledge of the self and when we are sufficiently advanced, perfectly pure then the spiritual master reveals the constitutional position who are you? What is our real identity within this body that is revealed to us? What is our relationship with Krishna and how to act in that relationship? But Narutam das Thakur was so advanced disciple of the very great Acharya loknath Goswami. He accepted only one disciple, Narutam das Thakur. And he was so advanced that on the very day he got initiated his constitutional position was revealed by the spiritual master. And he got special service of assisting the Gopis over there in the spiritual world. And one of his service was boiling milk for Krishna so always he was absorbed although his body was here but he was serving Krishna in his constitutional position always in the spiritual world. So he was boiling milk for Krishna once. Very nice pastime is there and while he was boiling milk the milk started spilling over because of being overboiled. And then he wanted to contain the milk using his hands and his hands get burned. This was all happening. Not on this level in the mind he was serving Krishna but then when he came out of this seva then actually he saw his hands were burnt and then with bandages he was roaming in vrindavan. He wanted to hide in this thing but then everybody got to know eventually and then Jeev Goswami who was his instructing spiritual master so Jeev Goswami asked what is this that has happened to you? And then he could not hide from his teacher so he explained that this is how it has happened and became so happy. You are so blessed. So in this way. These are the pastimes of the devotees and the Padmapurana, I think. Or some other Purana also mentions how on Brahmana similarly he was doing Manas Puja in the mind because he was very poor. He could not offer anything to Krishna. So the Purana mentions So in the mind he was cooking something very nice. So Krishna's service is so nice. So this gross energy is also energy of Krishna and mind subtle energy is also energy of Krishna. If you don't have such means, you can serve in the mind. So he was very poor in his mind. He was serving Krishna. So in the mind serving, he offered very nice. He made very nice sweet rice for krishna. And then he wanted to check whether it's too hot. And then when he touched it, his finger got burnt. And immediately he came out of his meditation. And then he saw actually his finger got burnt. So then lord Krishna became very much pleased. Immediately sent a Vakunta Vimana to bring him to Vaakuntha. So this is how Krishna is so merciful, so such a devotee. Although he is apparently in the material world, he is actually liberated. He is living in Krishna in the spiritual world and Krishna is also living within the devotee. Always the devotee can see Krishna residing in his heart and then Krishna explains apiche sudura charo Bhajate mam anan nebhak sadhuri vasamantavya samyag vyavasito hisaha so in order to attain this position a person has to Bhajate mam without any other deviation he has to worship Krishna. But when we start this process there could be some pitfalls due to our bad. Habits in the beginning so here Krishna is telling very important word sudharachar so the translation is even if one commits the most abominable actions if he is engaged in devotional service he is to be considered saintly. Because he is properly situated. So, just like many of us, we have now picked up Krishna consciousness. Some of us might be following all the rules. We would be doing morning program, evening program, preaching, contributing, and doing all the sevas. But some past habits it is difficult to give up so Krishna tells here what to speak of bad habit which is called durachar Sudhurachar sudhurachar means extremely bad habit abominable action if a person is engaged in devotional service and even if he commits most abominable actions which are not considered standard as per the material modern or moral understanding Sadhu Rey was a manta. Vya krishna orders. Mantavya means he should be considered sadhu. Only you cannot tell. That he is doing some very bad activity. He is not sadhu accidentally falls down from the righteous platform. You cannot tell he's a bad man. Krishna is telling never do like that. Because the person is different from the body person has surrendered to Krishna Bhajatimam anan Nebhak if he's properly situated, he is without any deviation anan Nebhak engaged in service of Krishna wholeheartedly morning to evening. Still because of past momentum, sometimes he accidentally falls down krishna is telling he should be considered sadhu only because he is properly situated. Samyad vavasitohisah and Krishna tells shipram bhavati Dharmatma shashva chantim NIGA chatti kante apritijani namibhakta pranashati simply become my devotee and then all such fall downs will not disturb you, ordinarily if you do little bad activity, then you have to suffer like anything in hell. If the guest comes to your place and you don't receive him nicely, and even if you don't give him some pleasant looks. That is a sinful activity. Simply by not offering pleasant looks, welcoming looks to a guest, a person will be sent to hell. So the laws of nature are so strict. But if a person performs even the most abominable activities he will be protected by Krishna. If he is always engaged in wholeheartedly rendering service to Krishna shipram Bhavati Dharmatma very quickly becomes righteous and attains Shashvat chantim nigachati attains lasting peace. Because he is engaged in service of Krishna, he is getting purified. So bad habits cannot continue. Body will get completely purified free from the lower modes. Oh Kunti, please declare it boldly. My devotee never perishes. And we see example also. Just like Bilvamangal Thakur was there. So he was great prostitute hunter and he was so much addicted to prostitute. Even on the death of his father he told all the priests please quickly finish the rituals. I have to go, I have to go, I have to rush. I have important work on the death of the father. He's not moved and he was so much addicted. On that day he wanted to visit the prostitute. Visiting prostitutes. That time people were very very cultured. It's around some thousand years ago. So that time he is visiting prostitute. And every day he was so much addicted. So somehow he quickly finished. And it was so difficult because it was raining heavily, the river was flooded. Prostitute thought today Bilva Mangal won't come and she went to take rest. But somehow he crossed the river. He jumped the fence, he knocked on the back door and he opens and she shocked. Bilva Mangal is here. Then how did you make it to here in such a stormy and weather and difficult situation. Then he explained how he managed. So it was not possible to cross the river but dead body somebody had floated in the river. He caught hold of the dead body and then he crossed the river. And when he came then there was because she had closed the door, she was not hearing. So then how to climb the fence? So he climbed the fence using a python which was resting on the wall. He not even careful about his life. So then the prostitute told that you are so much attracted to this temporary body of flesh. If this much attraction you have for Krishna, how nice your life would be. And when he heard that immediately it struck him. Because in previous life he was doing devotional service. He was advanced but he fell down. So again the person quickly reaches that level continues in the next life. So immediately it struck him. And then he continued moving towards he immediately left and he started moving towards Vrindavan. He renounced everything. And even though he got to such a level of realization there is nothing I have to just serve Krishna. And he left. Everything started moving towards Vrindavan. Again he got attracted by another beautiful woman. Which he saw on the way. And she was very chaste wife of a nice cultured businessman. And she noticed that somebody, some Sadhu is chasing me. And she started walking hastily entered her house and told the husband somebody's chasing me. So helplessly he is going towards Vrindavan. But because this habit is there woman hunting, he could not control. He started chasing following and when he went so that was the Vedic culture. The husband told oh, he's a Sannyasi, you please go and see what he wants, satisfy him, we should serve the Sannyasis sadhus. So she went out please let me know sir, how can I serve you? So he told mother, can you please give me your hair clip? She removed the hair clip and then he plucked out his eyes using those hair clips and he told what is the use of keeping these eyes? These eyes are taking me away from Krishna. So this is spiritual compassion. Sometimes the dress has to be destroyed or hound for taking care of the soul. So then without eyes so some people call him Surdas also in Vrindavan. So without eyes he lived in Vrindavan and he lived for 700 years. And his literatures were being read by Chattana Mahaprabhu also. And he was also following Ajagarithi just like Madhwindra Puri was following. He would not go and beg food from people like General Sanyasis would do. If anybody comes and gives him something to eat, he will take. Otherwise he will not take. So Krishna was every day bringing him milk personally. Just see how Krishna is so much inclined to service devotees. Ordinary Krishna is equal to all ordinarily the laws of nature. Take care of supplies or starvation as per previous activities. But devotees beyond laws of nature Krishna personally goes and serves. However, they should not take us to the other extent. Let us do all nonsense activities because we are devotees of Krishna. No, we should try our level best to never forget Krishna. But despite that initially we may fall down. But we should understand as long as I am falling down, I am not an advanced devotee. But still we should stick to devotional service, try to engage wholeheartedly and then we become Purified nami Bhakta pranashati devotee is never destroyed. And then Krishna tells now somebody can tell but Prabhu, what to do? I have got bad upbringing. I've got bad body, uncultured body. Very difficult to come out of such past impressions. So Krishna tell do not worry about your body. Mami parthivyapashritya yap su payonaya Strio Vashya SATA Shudra param gate Mo, Son of Pritha those who take shelter in Me, although they be of lower birth women, Vashyas as well as Shudras can approach the supreme destination. So these dresses or bodies are considered lower births. Because it is difficult to reach yourself to perfect platform, liberated platform. Because Rajasthamas is very high in such bodies. And these bodies are bodies of women merchants and shudras the working class now practically all the bodies in Kalyuga are not even merchants are also very less actual Vashyas. So women and Shudras, these are the only two classes which are there. So actually, we are all unqualified to follow the regular Vedic path. But here, Krishna tells it does not matter, but you have to take shelter of me. Vyapa shritya specific shelter of me those who take shelter of me shelter in me then it does not matter. Because this is a completely spiritual process. All the disqualifications are surpassed, and a person can attain param gaTim the highest perfection. So Krishna tells kim Bhanar Brahmana purnia Bhakta Rajarashtatha anitya masakum lokam Imam prapya Bhajasumam how much greater than are the Brahmanas, the righteous, the devotees and saintly kings who in this temporary miserable world engage in loving service unto Me? So when those who have not shown any interest in devotional service, they can advance or to speak of those who are already devotees or Rajarishis Brahmanas and very pious people, they have much greater opportunity to advance. So thus, Krishna concludes this chapter telling this most important shloka which Krishna has repeated twice in Bhagavad Gita now in this chapter citing it as most confidential knowledge. And at the end of Bhagavad Gita, Krishna again will repeat the same. Shloka sarvag guhitamam Bhuya again. Here the most confidential knowledge Krishna wants to tell. Of all the knowledge you can acquire, this is the top most secret. And that is mana bhavamad bhakto madhyaji mam namaskuru mana simply. Think of me? 24 hours always. This is how you should plan your life. Mad bhakto. Become my devotee. Madhyaji worship me. Mam namaskuru. Offer your respects unto me ma'am Eva. Definitely. If you follow this thing Ashyasi, you will definitely come to me. Engage your mind always in thinking of me. Offer, obeyances and worship me. Being completely absorbed in me, surely you will come to me. Atmanam matparayanaha matparayan means who is completely absorbed in Krishna, devoted to him. So if a person is completely devoted to Krishna just see it is so simple the topmost knowledge if a person is simply always thinking of Krishna within his heart engaged in his devotional service, worshipping him, offering him respects then he can go to Krishna, live eternally with Krishna. And not just all the anxieties are solved he enjoys unlimited happiness. But how to do this thing? Mana always think of Krishna engage in his service. For this we need the presence of spiritual master in one's life. Which is what happened with Bilvamangal Thakur. So we were discussing in the previous class. Krishna tells if you worship Devatas, you go to Devatas. They offer you temporary results. If you worship me, you come to me. You can worship me very simply by offering patram, pushpam, falam Toyam some leaf fruit and water. But you offer me with love. And if you don't have love then it will not be accepted. Then what is our hope? So our hope is spiritual Master. That is why it is a spiritual master who reveals us this most confidential knowledge. Who makes this knowledge practically applicable in our life. Thus below Mangal thakur how he was able to understand Mana Bhamat bhakto how nice your life would be if you have such attraction for Krishna. Because it is told his spiritual master spoke through the prostitute and some versions tell that spiritual master came as prostitute. So it is the rule. And the disciple asked Prabhupada that Prabhupada we have heard that as long as the disciple is not liberated, the spiritual Master stays in the material universe. So Prabhupada paused and then said yes, that is a rule but you do not do this thing, you do not create trouble for me. Don't bring me back again here you try very hard, follow sincerely the process and go back to God in this life itself. Otherwise Prabhupada told yes, that is rule. Once initiation happens, spiritual master takes charge of disciple. Unless the disciple is liberated, spiritual Master also is here in this material universe. Life after life. Just see, this is the significance of spiritual master in one's life. Life after life spiritual master is trying to give him instructions through he can give instructions through his books. He can give instructions through a materialist also spiritual Master is finding ways and means to give instructions. Any instruction which is striking our heart, it is actually coming through the spiritual master. The spiritual master is not there. No instruction can strike our heart and create any change whatsoever in our life. So thus when we offer anything, we have to offer to spiritual master and when we offer two spiritual masters spiritual master has great love for Krishna. He gives it to Krishna. And thus all our services, all our charity, all our offering food items are accepted by Krishna and we advance in our spiritual life. So this is the most confidential knowledge of Krishna consciousness. So this was the last verse of 9th chapter, the most important chapter. Prabhupada explains and this situation under the guidance of spiritual master begins with chanting the holy names of Krishna always 24 hours incessantly. So now let us do this most important practice and following which we will take up questions. If anyone has those devotees who are new you can kindly join our telegram channel which I am just sharing here before you leave. And today we have one special announcement. A great chance for all of you to make very good spiritual advancement. So this announcement I will make after the japa. So please stay put. Let us chant together and then very nice opportunity awaits us. So let us chant together with great attention. This process is very simple. Hare Krishna. Hare Krishna. Krishna krishna. Hare Hare hare Ram hare Ram ram Ram hare Hare this is what we have to chant each and every word. We have to pronounce discreetly here. Very very carefully attentively with attention, with love. We have to chant. Please chant one special mantra."
