So we are doing the fifth chapter of Bhagavad Gita, Karma Yoga Action in Krishna Consciousness.
In the previous session we discussed how to come out of entanglement of the laws of nature.
And surprisingly the same activity which puts us into entanglement that liberates us as well.
However, the activities which lead to liberation are the activities which are done as we saw in the previous session
only for the satisfaction of Krishna under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master.
Those activities liberate us. Activities are important.
And the activities, just like some activities only, they push a person into the prison.
And good activities, they elevate him or take him out of the prison if he behaves nicely.
In a similar fashion, the activities are the cause of trouble and the activities are the cause of liberation as well.
So here in today's verse, Lord Krishna is explaining how much entangled we are.
So let us see this very beautiful shloka.
Lord Krishna tells to Arjuna,
na kartritvam na karmani lokasya sriyati prabhu na karmaphala sayyogam sabhavastu pravartate
It means,
The embodied spirit, master of the city of his body, does not create activities,
nor does he induce people to act, nor does he create the fruits of action.
All this is enacted by the modes of material nature.
Please read again.
The embodied spirit, master of the city of his body,
this body is compared to a city having nine gates, as we saw in the previous shloka, does not create activities.
We think that I am creating some activities.
I am doing something and the situation or the people or the living entities, they are dependent on my actions.
But we are not responsible for creating actions.
The master of the city of his body does not create activities.
Oh, I will change people.
Here it is written, nor does he induce people to act.
Neither he's creating any actions, nor he's inducing people to act.
Just see this wonderful knowledge, which the whole world is in ignorance of.
Lord Krishna is explaining here.
The embodied spirit, the spirit which is in the body,
master of the city of his body, does not create activities, nor does he induce people to act.
People tell because of you I am suffering or because of me somebody is suffering.
Here it is told it is not a fact.
We don't induce anybody to act, nor does he create the fruits of action.
Oh, because of me, because of my work, such activity, this fruit has been produced, this result I have produced.
He does not create the fruits of action means he does not create the results also.
He does not create activity, does not create the result of the activity, nor does he induce anybody to act.
Just see how revealing this knowledge is, how the laws are of this material world.
Then how all these things are happening? We see some results are being produced.
If I work hard, I generate some money, I increase the economy, or I destroy things, I do something at least.
Or I maintain things.
But here it is told no, all this is enacted by the modes of material nature.
As Lord Krishna describes the same thing in another verse also.
Vimudhatma means extremely foolish living entity.
I am the doer. He thinks like that I am the doer.
But everything is happening by the modes of material nature.
Srila Prabhupada explains in the purport, the living entity as will be explained in the seventh chapter.
You can read it is also there on the screen, the purport.
Is one in nature with the Supreme Lord distinguished from matter, which is an other nature called inferior of the Lord?
Somehow the superior nature, the living entity has been in contact with material nature since time immemorial.
The temporary body or material dwelling place which he obtains is the cause of varieties of activities and their resultant reactions.
This body is the cause of all the activities and the reactions.
Living in such a conditional atmosphere, one suffers the results of the activities of the body by identifying himself in ignorance with the body.
Activities are happening because of this body.
When the living entity starts identifying himself with the body, then he suffers or enjoys the activities.
Just like if I think, oh, I am Indian, then if Indian team wins, I become happy. Indian team loses, I become sad because I'm identifying myself with the team.
If I don't identify myself with the team, I will not feel happiness at all that team wins or loses.
I will not feel distressed either.
So because I am identifying myself with the body, I think I am creating and I enjoy the good results suffer from bad results.
It is ignorance acquired from time immemorial that is the cause of bodily suffering and distress.
As soon as the living entity becomes aloof from the activities of the body, he becomes free from the reactions as well.
So how to become aloof from the activities of the body that I'll explain.
Then he becomes free from the reactions as well.
As long as he is in the city of body, he appears to be the master of it, but actually he is neither its proprietor nor controller of its actions and reactions.
So when the living entity is being addressed as the master, it means apparent master.
But actually as long as he is in the city of body, he appears to be master of it, but actually he is neither its proprietor nor the controller of its actions and reactions.
We are neither proprietor of this body. Anytime we'll be kicked out, that is called death.
We are neither controller of its actions.
We understand each cell of the body is controlling, being controlled by some forces, are being set into motion.
We have no control over it.
And then old age happens, we have no control over it. Death happens, we have no control over it.
And similarly, so-called actions of the body also, we are not the controller.
We are not the proprietor of the actions or reactions also.
We cannot control the actions of the body. We don't control the reactions also.
Then what are we doing in this body?
He is simply in the midst of material ocean, struggling for existence.
A person is there in the ocean. He is struggling very badly. That is our situation.
We are lost in this material world. This is an ocean of material energy and we are spiritual energy.
Just like a person, he is very happy on the land, but when he enters the energy of water, his situation becomes horrible.
In a similar fashion, we spirit souls are happy in spiritual atmosphere,
but in material world, we are simply in the midst of it, struggling for existence.
We are not doing anything in this body. We are simply struggling.
The waves of the ocean are tossing him and he has no control over them.
His best solution is to get out of the water by transcendental Krishna consciousness.
That alone will save him from all turmoil.
So when a person reads this, he thinks, so I am not the controller at all.
I am not controlling the actions. I am not controlling the reactions.
I am in the midst of oceans, suffering.
So then it means God is responsible for all the actions.
Here it clearly it is mentioned. He does not create the fruits of action.
He does not induce people to act. It means whatever bad thing I do, then God is responsible for that.
God is controller. Somebody is controller. I am not controller.
So immediately Lord Krishna clarifies in the second verse also.
Krishna is telling,
Immediately Krishna tells,
No, no, no, do not think that I am responsible for your paap,
for the sins that you commit or the good activities that you commit.
If you do not have free will at all, then what is the use of instructions which are there in the scriptures?
Oh, this is very confusing.
You are telling that there is no free will. I am not the controller of actions, reactions.
I am simply tossing and then you are telling Krishna is also not responsible.
Then ultimately who is responsible?
Krishna tells,
It is ignorance which covers the knowledge of the living entity
and living entities bewildered.
Nor does the Supreme Spirit assume anyone's sinful or pious activities.
Embodied beings however are bewildered because of ignorance which covers their real knowledge.
So here it is explained.
You can read the purport. Srila Prabhupada explains very nicely.
He does not create a particular situation for any living entity,
but the living entity bewildered by ignorance desires to be put into certain conditions of life
and thereby its chain of action and reaction begins.
So living entity desires, living entity first of all,
why we are telling that living entity is not the controller of actions and reactions
because material nature controls all the actions and reactions,
but basis the desire of the living entity.
So living entity is actually acting, but he is passive actor, not the active actor.
That is why it is being told living entity is not active.
What does it mean passive actor?
This word is used in Bhagavatam and many other places also.
Passive actor means as many people tell,
No, I am free. We are an independent nation. You are dependent nation.
So Prabhupada tells, what is your independence?
Prabhupada gives a typical example.
So when a prisoner would commit crime, there was a standard punishment given.
The soldiers will take him to the water and dunk his head inside.
And when the person is just about to suffocate, water is going to go inside.
His head would be pulled out.
And then, yes, you are free. You can breathe.
And just when he has taken a couple of breaths, again, his head is dunked back into the water.
So this much freedom we have in the material world, if at all we have freedom.
So that is why saying that thief has freedom or thief has got no freedom.
Freedom. Both are correct.
Thief has got no freedom practically because his hands and legs are completely tied.
Little independence he is made to suffer just for a few moments his head is taken out.
And now he is free. He can breathe.
When his head is in water, he cannot breathe at all.
Little freedom just to breathe will be given, just to breathe.
So is that called actually freedom? No.
So that is why it is told by Vidyapati, the great poet,
When a person is lost in desert and he is very very thirsty looking for water
and you give that person just a drop of water, will that satisfy his thirst?
That is the kind of satisfaction which a person derives from
from friends, from spouse and from social interactions
for which a person dedicates his entire life.
The happiness which he enjoys is
a drop of water in the desert.
So a living entity has got very little freedom.
In so many species of life when he is made a tree, he cannot even move a bit.
He cannot move an inch completely tied up.
When he is an animal, then also he is completely under the laws of nature.
He is completely under ignorance.
That is why there is no law of karma for the animals also.
Yes, head out of water, it means human being.
Now we have got little freedom, little freedom.
And this human chance if you miss, then again head will be inside the water
and then suffering again.
In so many animal species, worm species, bird species, fish species,
so much suffering will continue again.
Complete control, helpless under laws of nature.
Even now we realize we are not completely free.
We have so many desires.
Eyes force us to do something we don't want to do.
Tongue forces us, ears forces us, all the bodily organs they are forcing us.
Mind is forcing us so much.
So where is the freedom?
There is so much force in the body.
Krishna asks Sarjana, what is that?
Baladeva Niyojita, by forcefully I am dragged into sinful activities.
So we can understand there is force in this body.
This body is not free.
However, human form of life evokes little liberty.
This little liberty if we use for Krishna Consciousness,
dedicating all the activities to Krishna, then we become disentangled.
Otherwise we remain entangled.
So that is why Lord Krishna gives solution in the next verse.
So we should be very very careful.
I am thinking yes, now I have got good money, good position
and nice family, children.
If at all we think it is satisfying us,
if at all we think there is satisfaction,
the situation is not going to continue.
Next time what species we are creating in Kali Yuga?
Most of us are creating species of animals or even lower than that.
Then again all the freedom is lost.
Then suffering will continue.
A dog has been suffering the way it was suffering thousands of years ago.
No chance for improvement.
Human being has got chance, so he uses technology, develops things.
Unfortunately, he does not take the shelter of Lord Krishna's God's instructions
how to solve the problems of life.
Thus despite little independence, he simply complicates the things much more.
So Lord Krishna here explains further.
The solution.
When however one is enlightened with the knowledge
by which nescience is destroyed,
then his knowledge reveals everything
as the sun lights up everything in the daytime.
But when a person is enlightened by knowledge,
knowledge, wish knowledge, not some material sciences,
but spiritual knowledge,
then this knowledge reveals everything just like when the sun is up,
then all the fear, all the confusion, everything is completely gone.
So this knowledge destroys all such problems,
all such entanglement of the living entity.
So what does a person do in such knowledge?
It is explained.
When one's intelligence, mind, faith and refuge
are all fixed in the Supreme,
then one becomes fully cleansed of misgivings
through complete knowledge
and thus proceeds straight on the path of liberation.
When a person gets knowledge,
that means knowledge about the Supreme,
then his intelligence, mind, faith and refuge,
all four things are fixed in the Supreme.
Intelligence should be fixed in the Supreme.
Through his intelligence, he is always thinking
how to satisfy the Supreme person,
how can I engage myself in his service.
In this way, intelligence is used in Krishna's service.
His mind is constantly absorbed
in remembering his name, form, pastimes
and qualities of Krishna or his associates.
So intelligence is absorbed in the Supreme,
mind is also absorbed in the Supreme,
faith is also absorbed in the Supreme.
Some people may be engaged in Krishna's service,
may think of Krishna,
may think of chanting his name, may chant his name,
but faith is not developed, faith is not fixed.
Then again, success is not there.
Faith is fixed, but mind is not fixed.
Again, success is not there.
Mind and faith are fixed, but intelligence is not fixed.
So, of course, when a person fixes his mind perfectly,
intelligence and other things will get fixed automatically.
First thing is, somehow or the other,
we should engage the mind.
That is why deity worship is recommended
especially for the householders
who cannot engage much in the preaching work directly.
And because there is so much sense gratification at home,
deity worship is very, very important for the householders.
For others also is important,
but especially for the householders
because contamination is so much in family life.
So a person should very, very strictly follow deity worship at home
by worshipping the deities
Mind will automatically become fixed on the lotus feet of the deity.
And then chanting also will become very, very easy.
So mind is fixed in that way.
So mind and faith are fixed, but intelligence is not fixed.
Intelligence should always be used also in service of Krishna.
Intelligence, mind and faith are fixed, but refuge is not fixed.
I have not surrendered to Krishna.
I have not taken shelter of Krishna.
Then again, the suffering continues.
So refuge, a person should take complete tatparayana,
should take shelter of Krishna as well,
obey Krishna perfectly.
Then one becomes fully cleansed of all misgivings,
all doubts, apprehensions, confusions are gone.
There is no confusion in life.
Complete knowledge is there.
And thus he proceeds straight on the path of liberation.
And then what happens when intelligence, mind, faith and refuge
are all fixed in supreme?
A person is completely surrendered to Krishna,
thinking of Krishna, engaging in his service,
completely with full faith.
Then what happens?
Vidya vinaya sampanne.
So this is very important verse.
Vidya vinaya sampanne, brahmanae gavi hastini,
suni chaiva shvapakecha, panditaa samadarshinaa.
The humble sage, such a person becomes sage.
By virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision
a learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant,
a dog and a dog-eater.
Suni means dog, shvapake means dog-eater, outcast.
They are generally outcasts in the Vedic culture.
So we are supposed to discuss today,
am I a gentleman? Who is a gentleman?
What is good and what is bad?
So in this material world we think something is good
and we strive to become a good man.
Or some position is good.
He is living in a good house, in a good location.
He is having a good husband, good wife.
He is having a good job, good business.
He is having a good body
and we are willing to attain such good things in life.
However, panditaa, what is panditaa?
A person who has got such transcendental knowledge
which destroys one's entanglement.
So how the entanglement is destroyed, then a person sees
with equal vision.
Suni chaiva shvapakecha, whether he is seeing a brahmana
or he is seeing an elephant, he is seeing a cow,
he is seeing a dog or a person who eats dogs.
He sees all of them with equal vision.
Srila Prabhupada explains,
A Krishna conscious person does not make any distinction
between species or castes.
The brahmana and outcast may be different from the social point of view
or a dog, a cow or an elephant may be different from the point of view of species
but these differences of body are meaningless
from the view point of a learned transcendentalist.
This is due to their relationship to the supreme
for the supreme lord by his plenary portion as parmatma
is present in everyone's heart.
Such an understanding of the supreme is real knowledge.
So it is told in Srimad Bhagavatam,
If a person praises anybody who does not take interest
in whose ears krishna katha does not fall,
who is not interested in hearing krishna katha,
and if somebody praises that person,
those people are compared to
So if I am praising anybody in this material world,
that that person has done very nicely,
he is very noble, he is gentle, he is very kind,
that noble person, that gentleman,
has he got some taste for hearing krishna katha?
If he is not having krishna katha, then he is also animal
and we are also animal, it is being told.
Anybody who does not have interest in hearing krishna katha,
he is on animal platform.
An animal can be praised only by another animal.
Oh, that person is securing very nice marks.
Has he got some taste for hearing krishna katha?
And if I have got some respect for that person,
if I am having praises for that person,
then Bhagavatam tells,
we are in one of the categories,
either we are like a dog,
or either we are like a stool-eating pig,
or we are like camel,
or we are like as, one of these categories.
So in short, anybody who is not having taste of krishna consciousness,
he is considered an animal.
Because we saw here in the previous verse,
a person has got, not a person,
a soul has got no control over the activities of his body,
he is just a passive worker.
If I have got the body of a pig,
I would be forced to eat stool.
I do not have choice, either I would eat stool,
or I would not eat stool.
A prisoner whose head is taken out of water,
either he can breathe or he cannot breathe,
very little freedom is given,
means he would be forced to breathe,
or he would be forced to eat stool.
He cannot have very tasty dishes,
he is totally controlled by the nature.
So in a similar fashion,
any person who is not krishna conscious,
he is completely, almost completely under the control of nature.
So they are simply wearing different dresses,
and because of ignorance,
a person thinks, I am pig.
As soon as the soul thinks, I am pig,
then he is forced by the nature to live in the drain.
You pull the pig out of drain,
put him in clear waters,
again he will rush back to the drain.
The nature forces him to live in unclean waters.
In a similar fashion,
cow would be forced to eat grass only.
A dog would be forced to lick bone only.
In a similar fashion,
I have got body of a man,
body of a woman forced to get attracted towards a woman,
body of a woman forced to get attracted towards a man.
In this way, we are simply passive workers.
We can choose to breathe or not to breathe.
That's it.
Very very little freedom we have got.
But if a person is krishna conscious,
then yes, he has got freedom.
The more he becomes krishna conscious,
the greater freedom he experiences in life.
Otherwise, it is only madness.
Just like a person wears the dress of a lion,
and then he starts behaving like lion.
Somebody is having the dress of a horse,
he starts behaving like a horse.
So shall we tell,
oh, just see such a nice,
such powerful creature,
or somebody wears the dress of,
let's say,
politician or a big leader.
So we will tell,
oh, just see such nice hard work that person has done.
No, simply dress he has got.
Some dresses are designed to behave nicely,
some dresses are not designed to behave nicely.
The dresses which are not behaving nicely now,
will behave nicely tomorrow.
The dresses which are nice now,
will not behave nicely tomorrow.
In course of material nature,
sins are bound to happen.
Sins are part of this material nature's activities.
So that is why brahma becomes ant,
ant becomes brahma.
In this way,
sometimes the living entity goes high,
and becomes demigod.
Again, he becomes worm of the stool.
In this way, different species of life,
he keeps on rotating himself.
What is good today will become bad tomorrow.
They are helpless.
So,
if you see people behaving like the dresses
they are wearing,
you will call all of them mad people.
What is this society?
They are thinking that they are the dresses
in a similar fashion.
If we have got praise for anybody,
oh, this person is nice,
this person is bad.
It is only mental concoction,
what is good and what is bad.
For everybody,
there is different thing which is good.
The same thing which is good for pig's body,
will be bad for our body.
Which is good for our body,
would be bad for pig's body.
Therefore, it is only mental concoction.
Just like in dream,
you are thinking, oh, this is very nice sweet,
this is bitter, this is not a good taste.
That is all mental concoction.
Similarly,
Chaitanya Charita Amrita mentions here also,
the duality that we feel,
this is good and this is bad.
It is all mano dharma.
ee bhalo ee manda
Thus saying, this thing good and this is bad,
it is a mistake.
If anybody is telling in this material world,
this is good and this is bad,
Chaitanya Charita Amrita mentions,
it is a mistake.
ee bhalo ee manda ee sab brahma
Brahma means mistake.
So that is why
sometimes
many people request us.
And recently also
couple of days ago, I got request from
one devotee.
Looks like he is not keeping good health.
So he was praying, Prabhu, can you please pray for me?
For my good health.
And this thing is hindering my Krishna consciousness.
So he is a good devotee, very sincere devotee.
Maybe
he is hearing also this lecture.
But otherwise,
some people are not so advanced devotees.
They don't pray for good health for Krishna
consciousness, but so that they can become
happy. Please pray for my father,
pray for my mother, pray for
my whatever, XYZ.
And they pray, they think that they are suffering now because of
bad health, so I want good health.
So we should understand
this goodness and
badness. If anybody thinks this thing is
good, this situation is good or this situation
is not good, it is all illusion.
It is a mistake
to tell like that.
The so called bad thing, especially
when we suffer in this life,
these sufferings are very very good.
Because unless somebody suffers,
how shall he surrender to Krishna?
That is why the Devatas
don't easily surrender to Krishna. There is lot of
comfort. Their head is out of
water for some time. They will
not surrender. So when
a person suffers, then he surrenders to
Krishna very very easily. Mainly
people come to Krishna only when they are
in distress or having some kind of distress
in the life. So that is why distress
is so good. A person in
great material opulence has never
surrendered to Krishna.
Ok, so what about
Krishna Consciousness? I am suffering, but
I am praying that, Prabhu, please pray to
Krishna. Because my Krishna Consciousness
I am not able to chant properly,
engage in Krishna service, so much
time is getting wasted.
So if
you have asked anybody, any
of us for such prayers, please do
not feel bad. We all go through that
stage. You know, when we are in bodily concept,
we think, I am suffering, Prabhu,
please help me. That is alright.
But if you want to advance in spiritual life,
then that is not alright.
So that is why I educated
that devotee. Please never
never engage Krishna
in material benefit.
So if at all I want to improve
my Krishna Consciousness,
why am I praying for improvement of my health?
Immediately you can improve
when you are having bad health, you can
immediately improve your Krishna Consciousness
by thanking Krishna.
Whenever our health
is bad, we should thank Krishna.
Krishna, thank you very much
for taking me through this purification.
But I have one request.
This thing is very much
troublesome for me.
So please,
whatever I am suffering,
I know it is due to me because of my karma.
But please let me not forget your
lotus feet. And thank you
very much for this purification, for this suffering
which I have got.
So Shrimad Bhagavatam mentions,
And we can see in the
instance of great devotees,
Prabhupadi mentions, the pure devotees
do realize this.
Prabhupada's business was poised to become
very very wonderful.
But then suddenly,
it started collapsing.
So Prabhupada tells, by Krishna's
mercy, by business also was not
going well. It started collapsing.
So all the devotees,
they see material reversals
as great mercy of Krishna.
So it is told,
When a person thinks this is
Anukampa, this is Krishna's mercy,
whenever he suffers in life,
And with Hridh, Hridh means heart,
Vag means speech
and Vapu means body.
With his speech, with his body,
with his heart, he offers
obeisances, he thanks Krishna,
he offers respects to Krishna
for such suffering in his life.
Then liberation becomes his rightful inheritance.
Mukti Pade.
Lotus feet of Krishna, devotional service,
he gets automatically very easily
by this mentality.
So we have to understand,
Krishna is our well-wisher.
Whatever suffering we have in life,
these sufferings purify our heart.
Just like electric shocks,
they are troublesome, but they
purify a person of madness.
In a similar fashion,
the material suffering, it
purifies our heart
of lust and greed.
Ultimately, why a person is kept in jail?
Because of lust and greed.
So this, whatever sufferings we have
in life, these sufferings are very, very good.
So we have got two projects.
One project is
external project. We all have to engage
in service of Krishna. Without that, there is
no spiritual life. So we have
to either, you can construct Krishna's
temple, that is one project,
build a big community. Those who are full-time
missionaries, they can think like that.
How to take this knowledge across the globe?
This is one external project. How to make
so many devotees do very nice propaganda,
preach to many people.
And there is
internal project. What is that thing?
That is my purification.
How much
I am advancing in my Krishna consciousness.
So when body is healthy,
I am having good resources,
I can work on external projects,
that is preaching. When
my mind and body is not so good
and I am not having enough
resources also, we can work on
internal project. We can develop
equanimity in disturbing situations.
We can develop dependence upon
Krishna. We can please Krishna
by thanking for all the miseries that Krishna
has given to us. We can increase
our dependence upon Krishna. We can
increase our detachment from the material
world. How bad place it is. Just see,
so much planning I have done for happiness, still
I am suffering. I don't want to come here.
Thus it is told in Bhagavad Gita
or Bhagavatam
that this birth, death, old age and disease,
these things are
impetus for a devotee to surrender to Krishna.
So these things are very, very
good, always welcomed by a devotee.
And another thing is
we are very eager
to have mercy from Krishna
so that we can come out of sufferings.
But we don't want to obey Krishna.
So if a prisoner is praying,
please, please take me out of the prison,
take me out of this dark cell, I am suffering
here. And then
the king asks, so you will follow me now?
No, no, I will not follow.
Then do you think the prayers of such a person
will be entertained?
So there is no use, nobody will pray for such a
person. If that person also prays,
his prayers will not be entertained.
Yes, he can pray
that I will follow,
he can pray to king that I will
follow your instructions and try to follow.
Then that prayer would be listened to.
So we are suffering
in this material world and Krishna has given
solution for the suffering.
Srila Prabhupada tells people are very, very
eager whenever they come to saintly people
that please bless me,
they want blessings, they want mercy.
But how these blessings and mercy
enter our body, Srila Prabhupada tells,
devotees do not know.
So Prabhupada writes in Bhagavatam,
one of the purports, the blessings of
a saintly person,
the mercy of a saintly person
enters our body through
our ears.
So it is the instruction actually
which is the blessing, these people
do not realize. They think something
will happen, some energy will flow into me
and all these things, this is for foolish people.
So some foolish people
who want to cheat you,
yes, they may give you some material
benefits, some sadhus,
but they are not changing your destiny.
Simply the money was there in your account,
they simply have taken it out now.
From future, they have
given you now.
But they cannot solve your sufferings.
The devatas also do like that.
The results we get by worshipping the devatas,
simply happiness was destined for future,
I have got it now.
Otherwise devatas
cannot bring us anything which is not
in there, which is not
there in our destiny.
So in a similar fashion, the actual
sadhu, he does not, does this change of karma
unnecessarily.
So the real instructions, Arjuna,
what instruction was, what mercy
happened on Arjuna, the instructions given
by Krishna, how to come out of this
material world, people don't have any clue
I am not the body, don't have clue about the
actual situation, the eternal happiness.
So these instructions are the mercy.
So Prabhupada tells philosophy
is important, but practical
application of philosophy is more important.
So if somebody is not
participating in the regular temple
affairs, getting up early 4 o'clock
in the Brahmohurta,
doing the morning chanting, hearing
Bhagavatam class, engaging in service of Krishna,
preaching all these
instructions, so many do's and don'ts are there.
So if the person is not following
rules and regulations, but
he is reading so many books, he is hearing
philosophy, that will have no effect.
It will have no effect
in the sense it has
effect, everything has effect, but it would
take a very very long time.
So by hearing philosophy, we should be
very very eager to know the rules and regulations.
That is the meaning
of disciple. Disciple means discipline
Prabhupada tells.
Nobody has become happy without
being disciplined and
nobody can be disciplined without being a disciple.
So disciple
means discipline, when he follows discipline
he becomes happy, without discipline there is no
happiness in life.
So if I am, my happiness,
my disentanglement directly
depends upon how much eager I am
to put do's and don'ts, the rules and regulations
in my life. Whole philosophy
is to make a person follow the do's and
don'ts, that is called sadhana bhakti.
The practical practice we have to
do to come out
out of this illusion, come out of this disease.
To come out of disease, we have
some practical steps, we take something, avoid
something, do some exercise.
In a similar fashion, we have to take
practical steps, we have to change our
lifestyle, our routine.
And that is the actual mercy of the
spiritual master, his instructions.
So I am not following
the instructions completely. Still
I am praying
or I am requesting some prayers
that is not going to be effective.
That is cheating.
I am not surrendering, I don't want to follow Krishna
perfectly but I want to leave then that is
cheating. However
a devotee knows, anything, any
situation I am
every situation can be used in the
service of Krishna perfectly. There is nothing
unfavorable for a devotee. As I
told, if you are in positive situation
use that thing in the service of Krishna.
If you are not in a favorable
situation, use that thing for internal
purification. So either of
these two projects a person can always
successfully do, internal purification
and preaching. That's it.
Just like the typical example
is there of a sage.
I have given earlier also.
So the sage went and he met four people
and all the four people he gave different
benedictions. What were the benedictions?
So all the instances
whatever Prabhupada tells it is so beautiful.
So I request all of you please
hear Srila Prabhupada lectures every day.
So Prabhupada tells
this sage went to Rajputrka.
Rajputrka means
the son of a king, a prince.
And to the prince he told, Chiranjeeva
you have a very
very long life.
That is very good benediction. We all
expect that saints will bless us to have
a long life.
And then he went to Brahmanputra
the son of a Brahmana.
What benediction you offered?
He told, Maa Jeeva, you don't
live, you die immediately.
Oh my god, what is this? King Sanaj
got such a benediction that you have a very long
life. And Brahmana who is so
pure, his son got benediction,
you die immediately, you do not live.
What is this benediction? It is curse.
And then he goes
to third person,
Buchar.
To Buchar he gives benediction,
Maa Jeeva, maa mara.
You do not live, you do not die.
Oh, what does it mean?
And then he went to
fourth person, a devotee.
And he told
either you live or you die.
So what does it mean?
So the king's son
now he has got all opulences
and confers. And that situation
is considered a good situation.
We all aspire to have that situation.
You know when marriages happen, people ride on horseback
like kings and dress themselves
like king. We all want to become king.
But the king's son,
because of so many opulences, indulge in
all sinful activities.
Enjoying sensual pleasures, drinking
wine and all such unmentionable things.
So in this life you are enjoying because of
past karma, but future you are going to hell
and suffer like anything. So may
you have a long life because you can enjoy
more. After this your life
is miserable. So may you have a long
life. Enjoy whatever is there.
And then
the Brahman putra, he has done so much
tapasya in gurukul already
that if he dies now
immediately he would be liberated.
So there is no need for him to continue
to suffer here. So that is why
death, now soul
is full of unlimited happiness,
unlimited pleasure, unlimited opulences.
This body is the only problem that
we have. And by tapasya
he has made the best use of body. No need
to suffer anymore in this body. Do tapasya.
So we need not do
tapasya in a liberated platform.
So let him become liberated immediately.
So that is why apparent
bad blessing
or a curse for a Brahmana
is actually good for Brahman putra
if he dies immediately.
And Bhuchar,
Bhuchar's situation is very very horrible
because he has done so much killing
he is going to become killed ruthlessly
mercilessly for so many
lives and he will go to hell
also.
So he cannot
tell him that you die immediately because as
soon as he dies his next situation
is going to be very very horrible.
And he cannot tell him to continue
living also because
every moment he is living he is again
killing animals.
So he is implicating himself all the more.
So that is why his life is horrible now
because he is creating future bad karma
and future is also very horrible
because he has to suffer the results of the bad karma.
So that is why
either you don't live and you don't die
both things are horrible for you.
This life also you are creating future suffering
future anyway is horrible.
And the life of a devotee
either you live or you die.
Now you are engaged in Krishna's service here
and you are completely
unaffected by the laws of nature.
You are completely disentangled, liberated
and when you leave this body
you will continue the same service.
So you are liberated now also.
You will be liberated outside this body also.
So whatever you wish you do that was Ramaraj.
The death would come only to those
who want to die because now they are serving
Ram after death also they would serve Ram only.
So that is why death was optional
in Ramaraj.
Only to those who want it will come otherwise death also
will not come.
So that is why we should give up the
conception that something is good and something is bad.
So called bad things can be good
so called good thing can be bad in this
material world. So please give up
the concept anybody is a gentleman
anybody is good in this material world.
The dresses are good some dresses appear
to be polite, well behaved, nice, gentle
some dresses appear to be animalistic
or that of animals
because people think they are the dresses
they are behaving like that helplessly.
There is no need to praise. There is no need to
just like a madman wearing the dress of a doctor
we will not praise oh yes become doctor.
Everyone is a madman
who is thinking they are the body.
So who is a gentleman? A person who
100% surrenders to Krishna.
It is very simple
to understand. Who is not a
criminal? Who is a gentleman? Who
100% obeys the king or the
laws of government. In a similar
fashion when we 100%
surrender to Krishna without any
hesitation. Krishna or his representative
I should be willing to
stop any activity if my guru comes
and tells stop it. I would be
I should be willing to start any activity
if Krishna or spiritual master comes and
tells you start even though I may not like it
that is called complete surrender.
Living every moment
as per the direction then we are a gentleman.
So thus this
these instructions of Bhagavad Gita are so
very nice. So this is the vision
we should have not see the difference
of the dresses but we
should see the spirit soul
trapped within the within
every dress which is completely
full of eternal life knowledge
and happiness but because of ignorance
thinks I am the body and is suffering thus.
