Arjuna said, O Krishna, first of all you asked me to renounce work and then again you recommend
work with devotion. Now will you kindly tell me definitely which of the two is more beneficial?
As you would have received in the message that we send in our groups about the session,
we give some background which is present in the purport also. Why Arjuna has gone into this
question now? In the second chapter of Bhagavad Gita, Lord Krishna tells Arjuna,
that do not engage in this abominable work. Avaram means abominable. The whole world is
doing work and Krishna is telling this work is abominable. Which kind of work? The work in which
you want to enjoy the results of your activities. This is very, very abominable work. This you
should not do. And in the third chapter, Lord Krishna tells,
I am not bound by the cycle of action and reaction. I am completely free.
And Krishna tells to Arjuna, any person who has this knowledge about me,
he is also not bound by works. And any person who is having
transcendental knowledge, a person who is, a person who is having, means we are having in the
external, this body, means self, who is having pleasure in the self, not the externals.
Such a person is not supposed to do any work. Otherwise, inaction is punishable. Any person
who is in bodily concept of life, if he does not do his prescribed duty, that is punishable.
Because this world has to function nicely, Krishna has assigned various duties. But a person
who is self-satisfied for a self-satisfied man, who is in transcendental knowledge, there is no
duty. And in the fourth chapter, again, Krishna says, go for transcendental knowledge. It is very
important. It destroys all the past sinful activities, the knots of karma. But then at
the end of fourth chapter, all of you who are regular, you would have noticed Krishna tells
Arjuna, stand up and fight. So Arjuna is confused now that you are telling me to renounce all the
work. Work is meant for less intelligent people who want to enjoy the sense gratification.
And you are telling knowledge is important. Yes, I wish to go for knowledge. But then again,
you are telling me to work. So which is better? To renounce work or to work with devotion? Please
tell me definitely. So Lord Krishna replies. What does he reply? Let us see this shloka.
The blessed Lord said, the renunciation of work and work in devotion are both good for
liberation. But of the two, work in devotional service is better than renunciation of works.
So Lord Krishna very clearly has delineated defined here. So this is a confusion for many
people. There are two kinds of transcendent lists. One kind of transcendent list. They
leave all the material activities and they try to find what is truth using meditation,
reading the Vedas, et cetera. There is another kind of transcendent lists.
This class of transcendent lists, they directly engage in the devotional service of God,
devotional service of Krishna. So which is better? Mayavadi sanyasi and Vaishnava sanyasi.
One sanyasi you can figure out, they will not have any shikha on their head and they will carry
a stick, sannyas stick, just one single stick they would carry. And there is another class of
sanyasi, Vaishnava sanyasi. They will have shikha on the back of their head and they will carry
sanyas danda, which is actually called three danda. There would be three staffs or rod in that,
three bamboo sticks in that. Ek dandi sanyasi and tri dandi sanyasi.
One class will be wearing urdu tilak, which goes upwards. And another class of sanyasi,
they might be having cross tilak, like this. So these two kinds of sanyasis we find usually.
So what is the difference between these two sanyasis? So one kind of sanyasi,
they simply leave their work and they want to find what is truth. They want to find what is truth.
So one kind of sanyasi, they simply leave their work and they want to find
what is truth. Another kind of sanyasi is they engage in service of God. So which is better?
So here Lord Krishna has clearly given answer. There is no confusion.
He is telling definitely both are leading to Shreya. They are both best. They will lead to
liberation. But among both, of the two work in devotional service is better than renunciation
of works. So Srila Prabhupada very beautifully explains in the parapod.
Fruitive activities seeking sense gratification are cause for material bondage. As long as one is
engaged in activities aimed at improving the standard of bodily comfort, one is sure to
transmigrate to different types of bodies thereby continuing material bondage perpetually.
So this is common platform for both kind of sanyasis, both kind of renunciants. What is
the common platform? They don't want to engage in fructive activities. So Shrimad Bhagavatam tells
here so we have shared a video also today and
although many of you will be easily able to counter his arguments which are very lame in nature,
still few arguments may bewilder some of you. So that is why it is very very important.
He has accused
the people who are having faith in God of many many things. So few important points which I
could take down so we'll try to share and cover here. And if you read these couple of shlokas
which we have discussed here automatically we'll be able to have answer to many of his questions.
So here very important you can see its logic is mentioned in the second line.
So here it is mentioned.
This material world is called pavarga as I had shared in the beginning of the classes. What is
pavarga? So generally unfortunately he is also correct such rationalists those who have not seen
the video to give you a background. That video is about an atheist who is calling himself a
rationalist. He may call himself a rationalist and there is a group of rationalists who are discussing
about the state of religion in the world and in the country especially. So religion people
do not have a proper understanding. Religion means to go to place of worship and beg something for
your benefit. However that is not actual religion that is called asadharma. There are two kinds of
dharma sadharma and asadharma. What is asad? Asad means temporary and what is temporary?
This body is temporary. So dharma which deals with the well-being of the body that is called
asadharma. So in vedas also you'll find asadharma and sadharma. That is why shastras tell
adao guruvashrayam. Adao means beginning. The beginning of spiritual life is guruvashrayam.
Beginning of inquiry is surrender to a spiritual master and then what you should do?
Saddharma prachat. Don't take a guru for asadharma if you're accepting a guru for well-being of your
mind and body. No then guru is not recommended for that. Guru is recommended for what?
Saddharma prachat. Sad means eternal. Consciousness is eternal. Soul is eternal. If you have any
inquiries of consciousness, if you have inquiries of spiritual subject matter then you can approach
a guru. So all the religions which talk about well-being of the body and mind they are called
asadharma or kaitav dharma. Cheating religion. Why cheating? And at the same time it is religion,
word of god also. Why god is telling something which is cheating? Because people are not interested
to reach the ultimate state of life. People are interested in what? You can read in the first
line of this shloka. Noonam pramatta. Noonam is definitely, hundred percent. Pramatta means mad.
Who is mad? Definitely. Yad indriya preetaya apranoti. Indriya preeti means sense
pleasure. A person who is living his life to please the senses.
Everyone is pleasing his senses. What for the life is otherwise meant for?
Our education system tells us work very hard so that you can please your senses.
So any person who is leading a life dedicated to sense enjoyment, scriptures are telling he is
pramatta. Why he is pramatta? He does not see. Today somebody shared with me another
very interesting statistics. Now they are telling that 43% of the Indians, that was somewhere in
July, end of July that report, it came in all the newspapers. 43% of the Indians are depressed now.
So can you just imagine 43% and that survey was done to around 10,000 people, they are telling.
So means very elaborate survey they have done. And 43% of the people in India, they are in
depression, they are telling. Even if you go by very, very conservative estimates,
let's say 23% you'd use, then too it means one fourth, every fourth person of the country is
depressed and every fourth teenager is depressed and every second person in corporate is depressed.
Teenager thinks, so if I get a job, oh, I just want job, then I'll be very, very happy and people
are mad after job. So after job, the depression has increased. Teenager one among the four was
depressed. When he gets a job, one among the two are depressed. Every other person is depressed.
Is it not madness? And that interview, one famous journalist was taking of a very rich woman
and a billionaire woman. And she's telling that it's a common factor. It is a great equalizer.
What is a great equalizer? Somebody can be beautiful, somebody could be ugly, somebody
rich, poor, very eloquent speaker, a dumb man or woman. Somebody could be expert dancer. Somebody
may not have legs. Somebody could be very successful. Somebody may not be successful,
but there is one great equalizer, one common underlying thread. And what is that? Depression.
And people are telling successful people, I was depressed for no reason.
I was successful in every field. I was having a good career, good relationship also,
and everything was fine. Still, for some reason, I was depressed and many, many people express that.
So is it not madness? Then why you are working? If your work doesn't give you guarantee for happiness,
rather it gives you guarantee for depression. These are the statistics. Your work is leading
you to depression. And it is a it is a great equalizer. They are telling somebody is rich.
Somebody is in having is having any geographical location. Also, somebody is having a different
department. Also, somebody is doing work of his choice. Somebody is not doing the work of his
choice. Still, everyone is depressed. Depression is an equalizer. In their words, materialists,
they also agree. Still, if you continue the same path, this is called
madness. So Prahlad Maharaj is telling, I don't think it is good. Why do people
waste their life in madness for sense enjoyment? Same word Prahlad Maharaj is using.
So this body, which is temporary, which is they accepted this body to be themselves.
So let us see some of the points which he has raised.
So to help all of us, I have made a small PPT in which those questions are written.
Yeah, so I hope it is visible now.
So the first accusation is religion is irrational.
It is based on faith and you are supposed to surrender your mind.
As you saw in that video, he's telling, oh, if I I have not seen North Pole, because people compare
that, you know, you are supposed to surrender your mind. You are supposed to surrender your
mind. I have not seen North Pole, because people compare that you accuse people of faith
on having faith in God. They have not seen God, but you also have not seen North Pole.
Why do you have faith? So he's telling, no, no, that is not faith. That is belief. He has coined
a new word for faith. And that means even though I have not seen North Pole, somebody has seen.
And if I wish, I also can go and see that. But he's telling this religion is completely
based on faith. It is irrational and you are supposed to surrender your mind.
So we see Vedanta Sutra. Yes, as far as Asadharma is concerned, what is Asadharma?
Dharma, which is meant for body there, you will not find a spirit of inquiry
because you cannot expect a child to be very inquisitive. If you tell a child,
oh, you please understand which party is ruling America, which party is ruling India. What are
their policies? What is their agenda? What is their election manifesto? You should be aware of it.
Child will not take interest. He will not understand. So how do we make a child educated
to this level that he's able to understand the world affairs? We send him to play school. He
goes to school simply to play a school meant for. Is it meant for playing? No school stops all
playing eventually. There is no time for playing for interest exam. You have to lock yourself in
a room and study. Forget all the playing. But because the child is fond of playing,
he is brought to school and he's engaged in playthings. OK, you play and he likes going
to school. Yes, I'll go. And slowly he does not realize the torture starts and all the play and
work goes away and action sets in rigorous studies. So actually they want to make a child study,
but then you have to make him play a play school. Then he'll go there and then the book increases,
load increases, and then entire day and night he's completely studying day in and day out.
So that is why Asad Dharma, Kaitava Dharma, cheating religion, which are meant for less
intelligent people. Although that is bona fide, you cannot criticize it. You cannot criticize why
in the school they are making people play. No, those people, those kids are meant for playing.
That is a way to introduce them to education. In a similar fashion, Kaitava Dharma or Asad Dharma,
which is followed, or at least people have an affiliation to such kind of Dharma, majority of
the people, they don't talk about there. You'll not find a spirit of inquiry. However, as far as
Krishna consciousness is concerned, the culmination of our religions is concerned. You cannot accuse
that it is based on blind faith because this is where our philosophy starts with Krishna
consciousness starts from here. This is called Vedanta Sutra. Reject all the Vedas as we have
seen in the second chapter of Bhagavad Gita because Vedas, the Vedas are only talking about
the three modes of material nature. That means how to enjoy in this material world,
Karmakanda portion. You leave that. Now is the time to inquire. Inquire about what? Brahma. Brahma
means absolute truth. You are man, you are woman. This is relative truth. We will not remain a man.
We will not remain a woman. We will not remain an animal. Brahma Jigyasa means absolute truth. What
is truth? When I am sleeping and I am identifying myself with a body, I open my eyes and I realize
that was illusion. Similarly, this also could be illusion. Is it illusion or is it reality? This
is called Jigyasa. So human life is meant to do this Brahma Jigyasa. What is truth? Is this dream
or is it reality? What is reality? I come from my father. Fathers come from his father. What is
reality? Ultimately, what is the source? And after this, what is that Brahma Jigyasa? What is that
ultimate inquiry about absolute truth? You should inquire what is the source of origin,
maintenance, and destruction of everything. We see that there is a wonderful maintenance system
here. Our body is being maintained at a temperature. Our body maintains. Actually,
medicines don't heal us. Medicines simply suppress the symptoms. Body heals itself.
This the doctors will tell you. So this wonderful healing mechanism is there in the body. Any cut,
any wound is there. It heals itself automatically. That is called maintenance. So the body has got
inherent maintenance system. Temperature is maintained. Health is maintained. Everything
is maintained by the body. The nature maintains itself. In California, there were fires and they
with their advanced chemicals wanted to douse the fires of California. They thought, oh, this fire
is happening. We don't need this fire and some destruction of forests. So let us use our advanced
technology and stop it. So they stopped it and they were successful to some extent. But after
some years, such huge fire erupted that entire jungle and a very vast portion got burnt.
And then they realized actually it was our mistake. These small fires which happen automatically,
that is very important because some dry leaves, woods, the trees become dead. So this small fire
presents a big fire in the future. Otherwise, the dry woods keep on accumulating and then it
will destroy the entire village city. Everything will get destroyed. So these small fires are good.
It avoids big fire and it also replenishes the soil and maintains the ecosystem. Later they realize
then they stopped doing it. Nature maintains itself. We leave CO2. Somebody takes CO2. They
leave oxygen plants. We take oxygen. Nature is maintaining. So who is maintaining?
And death. Death is also very wonderfully and beautifully planned.
Death happens. Decomposition happens. So destruction is also very beautifully planned.
We can create things we may not be able to maintain. Sustainability is not there.
There is a great study in management schools and destruction also we are not able to do.
Simply we are putting garbage everywhere. In the water, in the air and in the sky also.
We are expert in putting garbage. We cannot destroy. We cannot maintain. We cannot create
properly. But somebody is creating. Nature creates, maintains and destroys very beautifully.
What is the source of creation, maintenance and destruction?
So some Vedic philosophers also they tell it is nature. Some people tell nature is being
controlled by a person. That is a person. Some people tell everything is under control of some
laws. These are different philosophies. But it is important to understand what is behind everything.
This maintenance, destruction. So this is Vedanta. Just see how lofty thought.
Now human life is time to inquire about absolute truth. Where is the cause of irrationality or
blind faith? And Shrimad Bhagavatam is the explanation. Artho yam brahma sutranam. Garun
Purana mentions that this Bhagavatam. It is Artho yam brahma sutranam. It is the artha,
explanation of Vedanta sutra. So what is Shrimad Bhagavatam telling? Oh Bhagavatam,
simply some stories. No, that is why stories are mentioned at the end. In the beginning,
in the first canto you will find this wonderful philosophy.
Everywhere it is being told. We all have desires. We are not dead stones.
Desire should not be used for indriya priti. The same word we saw in the shloka mentioned in the
parapod. One's desire should never be meant for sense pleasure. One should have only those many
resources which are required for keeping the body and soul together. Then what a person should do?
So for maintaining body and soul together, much effort is not required. We have so much energy
time where we should invest. Yes, you have a lot of energy to do karma. So all those endeavors
should be for tatvajgyasa. Tatva is another word which is used for truth. It is the same thing.
Tatva means truth. Tatva means substance. Substance and imitation or shadow. There are
two things. So in this material world, there is no substance. The same substance, electron,
proton, neutron. It will mix. It will produce water. Same electron, proton, neutron. It will
mix. It will produce air. Same electron, proton will mix and produce our cakes, our chapatis,
our rice. It is nothing but same electron, proton, neutron, which is creating different
combinations and manifestations. Some people call it electron, proton, neutron, and some people call
it Tejovari Mridam. In Vedas, it is mentioned. Tejovari Mridam yatha vinimayo yatra tri sargo amrisha
dhamna svena sada nirastu hukam satyam param dhimahi. I meditate upon supreme absolute truth.
And supreme absolute truth, he is a person. And where he lives, dhamna svena sada nirastu hukam.
That is the place where he lives. It is devoid of all illusion. And this world is full of illusion,
which is made up of Tejovari Mridam, earth, water, and fire. Prabhupada gives an example.
One nice doll you can make out of earth, water, and put it in fire. And then you paint nicely.
And then that doll would appear like a real woman. But that is not a woman there. That is simply a
doll, which is mixture of Tejovari Mridam. Similarly, this entire world that you see,
it is imitation of tatva. It is not tatva. It is not substance. We all understand this. It is fact.
There is nothing called actually iron, magnesium, sodium, simply a combination of electron,
proton, neutron, or Tejovari Mridam. Human life is meant for tatva jijnasa, understanding what is
real substance. This is imitation I have understood, but this is imitation of what human life is meant
to do that. Jijnasa. See here again, jijnasa. So who is real rationalist? This is a rationalist
whose life is dedicated for tatva jijnasa. There is no other purpose at all. Rationalists are very
fond of enjoying the sense pleasures. But a Vedantist, a devotee, is not at all interested
in anything but inquiring, knowing, and serving the absolute truth. Bhagavad Gita. We saw this
verse in the last chapter.
Therefore, to know that truth, what you have to do? Become humble.
Enquire by rendering service. Tatva darshina. Tatva. We saw truth. Darshina. Some people are
there just like some people are there who have seen North Pole. Some people are there who have
seen God. How you can say that you have not seen God, that is all right. But there are people and
those who have seen, they become spiritual masters and they explain to all others. And you also can
see if you follow the process. So those who have seen tatva, real substance, truth, you have to do
inquiry from them. Where is blind faith? In the beginning, Lord Krishna is telling,
you please put inquiries. Don't believe blindly, but humbly. Be humble and do seva also.
So blind inquiry and absolute, blind faith and absolute inquiries, both are not encouraged.
In saddharma, true religion. And then, after entire Bhagavad Gita is explained, at the end,
18th chapter summary, Lord Krishna tells,
I have spoken to you the most secret of the secret knowledge. Now what you should do?
You contemplate, deliberate, means completely. Not that I've explained now, quickly you decide.
Do you want this job or not? No. You completely deliberate upon it. And then, whatever you wish
you do. Where is force, sir? There is no force. Krishna, after explaining entire Bhagavad Gita,
putting all that effort, he's telling, whatever you wish you do. But deliberate completely upon
it what I've spoken. A complete deliberation is recommended. So Vedanta, Bhagavad Gita,
Bhagavatam, Krishna consciousness is not at all a dogma, an imposition.
It starts with Brahma Jigyasa and continues with don't do anything but Tatva Jigyasa.
And it ends with now ponder completely about it, what we have discussed. And then,
whatever you wish you do, there's no force. I will kill you, Arjuna, if you don't surrender into me.
Whatever you wish you do.
So this is Bhagavad Gita. This is called actual religion. And there are endless,
we have lack of time. Otherwise, entire Veda, there is nothing but Jigyasa,
Vedanta, there is nothing but Jigyasa. So we can understand this argument,
accusation about sadharma. Krishna consciousness is completely wrong.
Yes, other dharmas can be dogma. It is a fact. Prabhupada also mentions
because it is meant for people of that caliber. You are not satisfied with that.
Come to Krishna consciousness. So it is not based on faith. It is blind faith.
Yet faith is required, but that is everywhere required.
If we don't put faith on doctors, how shall we get ourselves treated? But before putting faith,
you use your intelligence to find who is the right doctor. In a similar fashion,
use your intelligence to find who is Tatvadarshi and then surrender. Then you have to have faith.
Child has got faith. Whatever teacher is telling in the school, he's studying that.
And as if the rationalist, he's completely out of this clutches of faith. This is great foolishness
and lack of intelligence. Everybody is having faith. Now, if a rationalist does not do this,
does not have faith in God, what does he have faith upon? He has got faith. He has got faith upon
money. Money will make me happy. Is it not faith? Or these days, many people are getting married.
Marriage will make me happy. Is it not faith? That is also faith. A faith which is the bag is
cat is out of the bag. It is openly exposed now. Nobody is happy after it. But then still everyone
is doing it. I'll be happy. Nevertheless, the whole world is suffering, but I would be happy.
So is it not faith? There is called faith. You are thinking after I get my life partner,
I'll be happy. Or after I get kids, I would be happy. Or after my kids get married,
I would be happy. But you are never happy. Depression only increases in the society.
So that is faith. And faith in something which you have not seen is much better than faith
in which something you have seen is not working. You know that you are telling
depression is a great equalizer. Still, you are continuing your work,
knowing that even though I may become very successful, I can attain what I want in life.
Still, I can come under depression and people are coming under depression. Still, you continue
that path without doing Jigyaasa. What should I do? Is there any category of people, any kind of
work doing which there would be no distress in life? Yes, there is a category.
So thus a rationalist is a great and greatest fool because he has got faith on something which he
seeing is not working. Faith on something which you have not seen that may work, but this definitely
fails that you have seen. That is why he's called mad man. Sense enjoyment does not satisfy. There
is no great logic required to understand this. Anything which you acquire, which you purchase,
which you get in life, you are not satisfied with that. You always want more. Billionaire always
wants to have 10 billion or 100 billion or trillion. Never satisfied. So this is called
pramatta. You are seeing it is not working. Still, you are having faith. So your faith is worse.
Not a single person exists without faith. Everyone is having faith. Somebody is having
faith on money. Money will make me happy. Somebody is having faith. I am this body.
Satisfaction of body will make me happy. Somebody is having faith. I am spirit soul.
And there are some people who rise beyond faith who see that I am spirit soul
and they see supreme spirit of God. So even though a person is not able to perceive,
if he is following the footsteps of person knowing absolute truth, he is also on a safe side.
But a materialist pramatta, definitely we can see he's mad, doesn't see depression is a great
equalizer. Whatever you do, everyone is affected by depression. So this first argument is completely
demolished. They themselves are having faith, which has been failing people.
If you don't educate a child at five years about religion, later, he won't take any religion.
And he does. Yes, my children, I did not teach them religion. So now I gave them option and
they are not taking up any religion. So because children are taught at a young age, this thing
goes deep in their heart and they start calling religion. Maybe true about Kite of Dharma,
about Asad Dharma, but it is not true about Krishna consciousness. We have many, many
people who were atheists and they are ardent devotees of God now and they are preaching
Krishna consciousness. So atheists have taken to Krishna consciousness.
He's telling a person takes birth in a religion and dies in the same religion.
That is true for Asad Dharma. Hinduism also is Asad Dharma. Apart from Krishna consciousness,
sense enjoyment, any religion which promotes sense enjoyment, either in this life or next life,
is Asad Dharma. Asad Dharma, it is true. It is fact. People take birth, they don't choose
and they die in that religion. But not true about Krishna consciousness, rather than so-called
Hindus who have some affiliation to Krishna consciousness. It is the Christians who picked
the first Krishna consciousness, then Muslims and then Indians at last. So why would Muslim
people in Middle East, Turkey, Iran, Iraq, all those countries, they picked up Krishna
consciousness first and Christians picked up, Jews picked up Krishna consciousness.
So Prabhupada first of all preached them, Africans picked up Krishna consciousness. India was the
last to take after Prabhupada disappeared from this planet. In the 80s, there was some motion.
Some people started understanding, Westerners are taking, we should also take. There was some
movement. Otherwise earlier, Christians, Jews, Muslims and Africans, all these people and
communists. So who have completely different perspective of world, they have no knowledge
about God. Where distribution of Bhagavad Gita was a crime. When Prabhupada went to Ashi, he could
not stay for long. And those people who were distributing Bhagavad Gita, they were put into
jail. And some people died. Also, they are put into Siberian concentration camp. So just imagine
a country where distributing Bhagavad Gita is a crime. He has no knowledge about God, complete
atheists, but they were intelligent. They came in touch with Bhagavad Gita and they became devotee.
Now, Russia has got a flood of devotees, flood of devotees. More than Hindus, there are Krishna
conscious devotees over there. So thus it is a complete wrong argument. People at 15, 20, 25,
30 years, they read Krishna consciousness and then they understood it. A person should be wise.
But yes, it may happen in today's education system. If you don't teach child at an early age,
he may not become, it may be difficult for him to understand because it is not that you're not
educating your child at all. He is going to school. He is hearing those nonsense theories,
which make him atheist. The world has come from an explosion, explosion caused by nobody. And then
beautiful Hrithik Roshan and Aishwarya Raya have come out of it. That explosion is so nice.
An explosion has created such wonderful beauties. Explosion has created everything. So he's reading
all such theories. So a child is being brainwashed. So that is why he becomes a hardcore atheist.
He has read Darwin at a soft tender age when he is pliable, when he is willing to put his faith
on anything he learns. That time you taught him Darwinism. That time you taught him some
wild chunk explosion. So he has put faith in all these things. Thus he becomes a strong atheist.
And still they get converted by Krishna consciousness. It is so logically strong
philosophy and religion. So does this argument also does not stand
because maybe his children, he, they went through modern education system, which is atheistic.
You are teaching one theory. You preach competing theories. Also you preach Bhagwatam Bhagavad
Gita. Also, nobody can stand against such arguments, but he got educated in
atheism, atheistic sciences. That is why maybe it is difficult for him. Otherwise,
atheists have picked up entire communist, atheistic countries. There is flood of
devotees. Rather they have picked up Krishna consciousness like anything.
People of other religions have picked up. So this argument also does not stand.
Then he's telling it's like liquor. Harmful effects are much more. So another person he told,
yes, religion has got some harmful effects. Some people fight, but just like the river,
it brings mud, gravel, and so many things, but we don't reject to drink the water of river.
Then he told why you are comparing it with river. What about liquor? He told, yes, liquor is very
bad. It should be banned. So he told religion is just like that liquor. Liquor might have some
medicinal good properties, but more or less it is harmful for society. So it should be banned.
So then he tells where there is more religion, there is more violence.
And he tells, even if it has good effects, anything which is based on illusion should be
rejected. Karl Marx tells it is the opium of masses. So he's telling, first of all, it is bad.
And even if you are telling it is not bad, even if it is having good effects, if anything, which
is based on illusion, hallucination, which is not reality, it should be rejected. So he tells,
it should be rejected. So a person may laugh at this argument that they want to be
preachers of truth only when it comes to spiritual life. And then you ask Mr. Rationalist,
what is your job? What are you doing? And he is working for entertainment industry.
One is a comedian. Another is a lyrics writer. Both work for entertainment industry.
So entertainment is reality. Making some movies and somebody is dying over there and the audience
is crying. There is some affection, attraction, and then fight and then violence. So this is reality.
Movie and entertainment world is reality. No, no, no, no, that is okay. So any enjoyment,
which is coming out of Netflix, which is coming out of movies, which is coming out of
all these entertainment comedy shows, that is reality. So just see they have no common sense.
If anything based on illusion should be rejected, then first of all, reject entire Bollywood,
reject entire cinemas, reject all the entertainment. That is complete illusion thing,
complete illusory thing. No, no, no, there it is okay. That kind of illusion is okay.
Creating stories, fiction is okay. Harry Potter should be read and all of the fiction novel should
be read. Movies based on that should be promoted, but this should be rejected. This is not based on
reality. So where is any sound logic in this? Life should be based on common sense.
So we can understand they are proclaiming that life should not be based on scriptures. I don't
want to lead myself as for some book. I want to use my common sense. And where is the common sense
of these people? They don't understand they are having blind faith that money, fame, success,
name will make them happy. We have discussed enough, isn't it? Sense gratification will make
them happy. Is it not blind faith on something you see it is failing?
And these irrationalists, they are very fond of eating non-vegetarian. So is it not common sense
that if somebody cuts my hand, I feel pain. You are cutting somebody's hand simply for
satisfaction of your tongue. That living entity does not feel pain. So where is your common sense,
sir? So meat eater does not have even basic common sense. So where is your common sense, sir?
All senses gone into dustbin. If somebody cuts my hand, I feel pain. Why should I cut somebody's
hand, leg or throat simply for the satisfaction of my tongue when such non-violent means of
consumption are already available? So thus, I think it is enough and it is completely illogical.
But if we are not following Krishna consciousness, we are not having sattvic energy, we break four
regulative principles, then we will keep on getting confused with these basic questions also.
So that is why clarity comes because of an energy which is called satvaguna. The more we are
sattvic in life. So that is why Zubh Goswami tells, first of all, become sattvic. So this asad dharma
also slowly brings person to satvaguna and on the platform of satvaguna, he can understand and all
these things will not disturb us. However, in the initial phases, if we have lust, greed, rajas,
tamas very predominant in our body, we may get confused by such questions.
So going back to Bhagavad Gita, let us quickly finish the shlokas.
So that is why here it is being told in Bhagavatam.
So a person will keep on getting defeated. How much ever success you
have in life, you will be getting defeated. Satisfaction will not be there and ultimately
you lose all your success, there is death. Defeat is sure here.
Unless a person does inquiry about self, about truth.
So Krishna is telling
So because all people do not have, what we discussed is actually thought of a rationalist,
which our Acharyas have given us, which is common sense, which is not difficult to understand.
But even these things don't strike people having many great degrees in modern education.
So to such people, they cannot appreciate the highest understanding, highest philosophy.
But this common sense, a person can very easily understand,
there is no enjoyment, there is no satisfaction in sense pleasure, sense gratification.
This everyone understands. So for such people,
karma sannyas is recommended. What is karma sannyas?
Okay, at least you have understood sense gratification is not satisfying.
It is only frustrating. It is like an itching sensation which keeps on increasing.
So at least leave this sense gratification and inquire about absolute truth.
So take sannyas, stop all the words of all the works of sense enjoyment.
But then those people who are wise, who have positive knowledge of absolute truth,
who understand absolute truth as a person, they engage in the service of that person called God
or Krishna. So that is why Krishna is telling
both are good. Somehow you leave, you don't commit crime, at least you will not be
harassed and beaten by police. You would be peaceful. If police is beating you,
where is the question of having positive knowledge or wisdom? So stop committing crime.
So leaving sense gratificatory works, sannyas is good. And karma sannyas better than that is
karma yogam. Yoga means any action which connects you to God. So if you are more wise, more
intelligent, then you can understand what is God and engage in service of God.
So Krishna is telling, you engage in your work, but you do not hate nor desire the fruit of the
activity. Such a person is liberated from all dualities. He easily overcomes material bondage.
So Krishna is telling Arjuna, advanced devotees, they engage in work, but the result which is
coming out of the work, they don't hate it. Like the neophyte sannyasis, they hate everything,
go to jungle and Himalayas. They understand Himalayas belong to Krishna. City also belongs
to Krishna. Wherever Krishna's work requires me to stay, I will stay there. Some people may be
required to go to jungle, they would go there. Some devotees are waiting because their duty is
to start satyuga again. So some people are doing tapasya in Kalabgram and other places in Himalayas,
Bhagavata mentions, but other people are required to spread Krishna consciousness. So they are there
in the city spreading Krishna consciousness. So devotee does not hate nor desire the result of
his activities.
Sankhya yoga upritak bala pravadantina pandita ekam api asthita samyak ubhayor vinda te phalam
Krishna tells only the ignorant speak of karma yoga and devotional service as being different
from analytical study of the material world or sankhya. Those who are actually learned say that
he applies himself well to one of these paths, achieves the results of both. So foolish people,
they are telling Gyan yoga is different and karma yoga or bhakti yoga is different. It is same,
same ladder. These are different rungs of the same ladder. You put, if you are capable enough,
you directly put your leg on the highest rung. You quickly climb the ladder. If you are not able
to do that, then put your step firmly on the first rung. Then also you'll climb the ladder.
You will attain the same result. If you are able to understand just common sense knowledge,
which Lord Buddha taught, be non-violent at least. Don't kill, don't harm animals. Sense
enjoyment does not make you happy. This is Buddhism, just basic philosophy. Leave material
activities. First step. Beyond that, if you are able to understand what is God, you do some work
which is connected to God, God's service, then that is much better. So foolish people tell that
these yogas are different. Krishna will further explain in 12th chapter and now also he's explained
that it is the same thing. The same result ultimately is attained. Just stick to the ladder.
So a person, one who knows that the position reached by means of renunciation can also be
attained by works in devotional service and who therefore sees that the paths of work and
path of renunciation are one, sees things as they are. So Arjuna wanted to renounce everything,
but Krishna is telling, no, by fighting, but fighting for me, you can attain the same result.
So Krishna very clearly is telling. One who knows that position reached by means of sannyas,
renunciation can also be attained by work in devotional service and therefore he sees that
the path is one only. Renunciation is the beginning of path and action for Krishna is much progressive
stage milestone in the same path, but path is one. The path of work and the path of renunciation are
one who sees that at the same path, he sees things as they are.
Then if it is one, then let me follow anything. No, here Krishna very clearly mentions which is
higher rung, which is progressive stage and which is the initial stage. Tu, tu means but.
Although Arjuna I am telling that Sankhya and Karma Yoga are same thing. Renunciation and this
thing is the same path, but there is a but here. Do not think both are equal.
Unless one is engaged in the devotional service of the Lord,
mere renunciation of activities cannot make one happy. The sages purified by works of devotion
achieve the supreme without delay. So first of all, if you simply take sannyas,
leave the material activities, you will not be happy.
Material enjoyment means great distress. He comes to peace, but there is no happiness in life.
For happiness, a person has to engage in devotional service, Karma Yoga. And another advantage is
very quickly you attain the supreme without any delay. A person who has taken sannyas,
Lord Krishna will mention further. It will take him very, very long time. But a person who is
engaged in devotional service, very soon he will attain the supreme. So that's very clearly the
devotional service is mentioned here. So please forget all that the great rishis who were spending
so much time in Himalayas, taking sannyas, having no knowledge by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
having no knowledge by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's mercy. Here also Lord Krishna is not giving
the complete final truth that he will reveal at the end because he was hesitant. People are at
different levels. So Srila Prabhupada explains Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is very merciful. He has
given the highest truth immediately and by His mercy we can understand. So if we directly engage
in service of God, we attain all the result of renunciation and we attain the supreme
without delay and with enjoyment.
