So we discussed in the last class how the depression is a great equalizer.
People are putting so much effort and some people, they become successful in their efforts.
Some people are not so successful, some are utter failures.
But despite your socio-economic status, physical, psychological status, there is one great equalizer.
I very much like the term when it was used, equalizer, the great equalizer, that is depression.
And depression is just, we discussed how 43% of the people by the end of July in India,
they were reported to be suffering from depression.
Every fourth teenager, every second working professional in corporate, he is having some
form of depression.
So just like now we are seeing this widespread epidemic is there.
So as soon as a person is suffering, he immediately approaches a person of knowledge, doctor,
that please tell me why am I suffering?
What is the cause of my suffering?
In a similar fashion, if we are suffering as human beings, we are not supposed to be satisfied.
So I have tried everything, even those who are successful, those who are beautiful, those
who are rich, those who are strong and stout, everyone is suffering.
Then what is the cause of suffering?
What is the equation behind suffering?
This thought should come and a person should be very, very inquisitive.
Then he's a human being.
If he's not inquisitive, then he's animal.
Dog is suffering the same way he has been suffering.
Dog has not been able to make a nice house for him.
Dog has not been able to make a nice kitchen for him.
Every night he has to wander for some food and he scavenges here and there.
He has maintained the same situation.
Sufferings are of the same level, but human being inquires.
And because of this inquiry, only we have made so much scientific development.
But this scientific development has just aggravated the problem.
People have become more trapped in various sufferings.
That is why Sanatan Goswami, the wisest man, he asked Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
Gramya Vyavahare Pandit Kaurimani, Gramya Vyavahare, means in the local talk, in the mundane talk,
Pandit Kaurimani, people tell that, oh, you are a very great scholar.
You are Sanatan Goswami.
They were ministers in the country of Bengal.
So you are very learned, Pandit Kaurimani.
And he's telling, I also think that I am a learned man.
People praise me and I am so full, I believe that I am learned.
But the actual reality is, I do not know what is good for me and what is bad for me.
And actually, nobody knows.
That is why we go and take help of doctor.
Then doctor tells, oh, no, no, no, this thing is bad for you.
And this mask is good for you.
Sanitizer is good for you.
A few things they will recommend, a few things they will tell you to abstain from.
So a person of knowledge will tell what is good and what is bad for us.
I am suffering.
This means I do not know what is good for me and what is bad for me.
If you are completely free from the sufferings, then you can continue.
But if you are not completely free from the miseries, then we should ask this question.
Where is knowledge?
What is truth?
This is called Brahma Jigyasa.
Only in human form of life, a person can do this Jigyasa.
So when I see that there are so many, as soon as you see any vehicle, any car on the road,
it is understood it is very, very easy to know that somebody has manufactured this car.
And we look for or we know that what is this brand, which is the company.
We know there is a factory somewhere.
And under somebody's direction, this creation is taking place.
Automatically, if somebody tells you the vehicle has assembled, then it is foolishness.
Similarly, it is not very difficult to comprehend that these bodies, all these bodies are created.
Such wonderful bodies.
So Prabhupada told, yes, what your science has done.
No, we have made spaceships, space shuttles and rockets and planes.
Boeing, such a big thing can make many, many hundreds of people fly.
So Prabhupada told, yes, that is amazing.
That is nice.
You have done.
But I am more interested in the creation of natural plane.
You see mosquitoes, so many birds.
Our plane only, it needs a strip to land down.
But mosquito, it can land on the ceiling also.
So isn't it amazing creation that the plane is landing on the ceiling.
You make such plane, it can hang itself like that.
It can land anywhere on the wall, on the ceiling.
So what is this wonderful creation?
And you are expert to make big machines.
If I tell you to make such a small plane like a mosquito, shall you be able to make it?
Such small rotors and motors and machines and everything, chips.
Very tough.
So who has put such small machines?
You see sometimes insects dot size.
But that insect of dot size will have similar anatomy like we have in this human form.
He will have the same system, some nervous system, digestive system, and all these things it will have.
So who has assembled these small parts?
What is this amazing creation?
This body is much more complex, self-maintaining vehicle and self-replicating vehicle.
If any car is there and that car starts producing new cars on its own, isn't it a wonderful engineering?
It needs a very extraordinary creator.
So thus it is easy to understand that all these vehicles are created.
Now if they are created, why somebody is given a broken vehicle, not so good vehicle, and
it keeps breaking down and so many sufferings are there?
Why somebody is born rich?
If God is a controller, why somebody is poor?
Some people are born handicapped.
Why all these things are there in society?
Does it mean God is bad?
Because everything is in control of God, we understood, oh yes, there is a vehicle manufacturer.
So there is somebody who has created all these machines and he has got all these systems
in place to maintain and finish those machines.
So everything is under his control.
So if everything is under his control, then he is a villain.
He is a very whimsical man.
Somebody is enjoying nicely, somebody is suffering.
So how do we understand that?
Can you please write in the chat?
Is God bad or good?
If bad, why?
If good, why?
How do we understand?
So let us see how much Bhagavad Gita we have understood, we have been hearing.
Somebody can accuse.
Why you are worshipping God?
Your God is bad.
Okay, Satyam is telling no, God is good.
No, Krishna is so kind.
A father controls a son, but doesn't mean law of karma.
God is always our well-wisher.
That is nice.
But what is the logic?
How do we understand?
You once told God is neutral.
I may be lying.
I am God's servant.
I work for his company.
Why may we lie?
He is all good.
We are judged by our karma.
Good.
That can be one argument, as some of you have written, that he is good, but we are judged
by our karma.
But how do we know that he is good?
We may be judged by our karma.
He can be a villain also.
He likes to torture others.
How do we know that?
Both philosophies could be there.
Either karma, sometimes some kings were there.
They would be very, very just to their subjects.
His son has done some wrongdoing.
He would punish his son also.
But some kings, they were very musical, like Kansa.
He wanted to kill.
He killed so many children and he wanted to kill Krishna also.
So how do we understand that God is good?
God is above good and bad, and he always does what is right.
That is your blind faith.
All our condition is because of past karma.
That could be there.
Karma is a different thing.
Could be there, may not be there.
But how do we understand that God is good?
God is not bad.
Krishna has given us the free will to do whatever we do, so he can't be villain.
How do you know that there is free will?
I don't want to die.
He forces me to die.
He forces diseases upon me.
Why is forcing diseases upon me?
Because he is the creator, we face problems or goodness on account of our free will.
Okay, this could be your understanding.
How do we know that God is good?
Akash Hathkar, he has given good answer, which is pretty close.
Let me see if somebody can tell.
Whatever we have got till now is all good for me.
No, not really.
We have got so many diseases.
We have got so many pains and we will face death.
So these things are not good.
We are getting what we deserve.
How do we know that we may be getting few things we deserve?
God may be little good and little bad also.
How do we know God is absolutely good?
I should surrender to God and love him.
Krishna has mentioned in BG that I'm your best friend because he's speaking.
Obviously, he will not speak bad about himself.
Even after not worshipping, he provides all these things, even for atheist and for theist.
Okay, so I agree that he is little good also because he is taking care also.
But otherwise, sometimes he punishes also.
How can we prove that this punishment is just because of our karma and not because of badness
of God?
Because he is the creator, he will only create good.
Not necessary.
We create many things bad also.
God stays with us as super soul, even we suffer and enjoy.
Krishna is transcendental above the mode of material nature that is pure goodness.
How do we know that?
Okay, no problem.
So Akash Hathkar gave a nice understanding.
Okay, yeah, we can stop posting now.
I will explain.
He has nothing to gain by lying.
Yeah, he has nothing to gain by doing bad, but then he is whimsical.
He likes to do bad, make people suffer.
Okay, no problem.
So you can stop posting.
I will explain now.
So that is why Prabhupada told, it is very good to have faith somehow if we can have
faith on Krishna and continue, engage in his service, that will make our life perfect.
But what happens, this world, especially in Kali Yuga, it is full of atheists and we are
also lusty and greedy.
So this lust and greed, lower modes, rajas and tamas can shake our faith anytime and
wrong association.
So that is why we should scrutinizingly read the books very, very carefully.
So spirituality is not some kind of magic.
Prabhupada could have shown some magic and immediately everyone would have surrendered
or Krishna would have shown some magic, isn't it?
If Prabhupada comes here, starts flying in there and he starts creating some flying planets
that a yogi can do very easily.
So who will not surrender?
But they don't do like that because tomorrow another yogi can come.
So being a yogi is not spiritual life.
Being a yogi is another material perfection.
Some people do it with the help of science, some people gross science, some people do
it with the help of mantric science and by meditation they can create some wonderful
effects in the nature.
So today, if I show some magic, you can follow me tomorrow.
Some other magician will come and you will start following him.
So spirituality is a scientific pursuit of absolute truth, scientifically logically understanding
what is truth of this life.
And because truth is spirit, this subject matter is called spirituality.
Ultimately, everything is spirit in different manifestations.
There is only spiritual energy and the source of that energy completely spiritual person
God.
So okay, how can we understand that God is good?
So very beautifully it is explained in the scriptures.
Yan naam shruti maatrena puman bhavati nirmalaah.
So there was one person and he was a very, very ruthless hunter.
His name was Mrigari.
His story, it's a history.
It is given in Shrimad Bhagavatam, Chaitanya Charita Amrita.
So he was such a ruthless hunter, how he would do is he would half kill the animals and animals
would be trembling in pain, but he will not have pity rather he would enjoy seeing the
animals wriggle in pain.
So Narad Muni happened to pass by and he got very much afflicted seeing the suffering of
the animals.
And then he was seeing that who is that person who has created all this trouble?
And then he saw that hunter hiding behind and he was about to shoot some other animal
also with his arrows.
And Narad Muni went there and those animals which he was trying to kill, they ran away.
So the hunter became very much disturbed with Narad Muni that, oh, you have my animals went
away.
You disturbed my act.
And he was about to hurl abuses upon Narad Muni.
But Narad Muni is so much highly situated on Vishuddhisattva Guna, such an advanced devotee.
He is spiritual master of entire universe.
All the stalwart devotees in Bhagavatam that we see, it could be Dhrumaraj, Prahlad Maraj
or so many other disciples.
They are all disciples of Narad Muni.
So Narad Muni, he was so much advanced in spiritual life by his influence.
Abuses could not come on his tongue.
So this is called influence because of tamasic influence, our words, our speech, our thinking
changes.
And because of sattvic influence, again, our words, thoughts, speech, everything is because
of influence of energy.
So Narad Muni's influence was so high, even though he wanted to, but he could not speak
ill words.
But then he requests Narad Muni that, sir, why you have come here?
I am engaged in my business.
So Narad Muni told him, what kind of business you are doing?
Don't you feel, don't you see the animals are suffering?
If you want to kill them, you please kill them completely.
Deliberately, you are giving pain.
It will, you will end up having a very, very miserable life.
You will suffer in this life and in the next life also.
So Hunter told, no, this is the way I enjoy.
So enjoyment is of different kinds, sattvic person enjoys differently.
This is the enjoyment of tamasic person.
He wants to kill others and inflict pain to others, hurt others.
This happens in tamoguna, in destroying others, harming others, offending others, the person
feels happy.
So he was enjoying such kind of happiness.
He told my father has trained me like this.
I enjoy this kind of killing.
So Narad Muni explained him and by the influence of Narad Muni, he was able to realize this
knowledge.
So that Shri Prabhupada tells the degree to which the other person will be able to realize
this knowledge.
It depends upon your spiritual purity.
So that is why if you want to preach Krishna consciousness, spread these words, you have
to also behave very nicely behind the scene.
You cannot be not following things and then you speak all the words and try to repeat
what is there in Bhagavad Gita and Bhagavatam.
It is not going to be effective.
So we all have to very sincerely keep ourselves clean and follow the standards very nicely
and then we will be able to give effective instructions, otherwise it will be ineffective.
So Narad Muni's instructions became effective to even such a rotten tamasic person like
Mregari.
So Mregari told, he understood, oh, I am going to suffer in future so much.
So please tell me how can I get rid of the offenses I've done in the past?
So then Narad Muni told him that you simply sit here and whatever you have, whatever belongings
you have, you donate to the Brahmana.
So this is the first step.
So everything, all the possessions are to be given in charity and then you go outside
the village and sit in a hut and chant Hare Krishna mantra there and worship Tulsi Maharani.
But he told, how will I sustain myself and my family?
I have family.
So Narad Muni told you, don't worry, I will supply you the things.
And Narad Muni then went to the village and told the villagers that this person, Hunter,
has become a very great Vaishnava saint.
So as soon as this news got spread, so people were knowing the importance of Vaishnava.
They all wanted to have his association darshan and take offerings for him.
So many, many people from the village, they started visiting the Hunter and Hunter was
chanting there.
His wife was there, maybe children, I'm not sure.
And he was living in the hut and worshiping Tulsi Maharani.
And so much food was coming to him that he started now distributing prasadam.
What he will do with so much of food?
And then after some time, Narad Muni then visited that Megari along with his friend
Parvat Muni.
And then he told, OK, let me take you to one of my disciples.
And then he gave the background.
And when he saw Narad Muni spiritual master after some time, and he was very much delighted
and he immediately, he offered obeisances, rushed towards Narad Muni to meet him.
And when he was reaching Narad Muni, he was jumping here and there, was not having a steady
walk.
So then when he went closer, so Parvat Muni asked him that why you were jumping like that?
So he told, actually, there were so many ants on my path, I was afraid they would get trampled
under my feet.
So Parvat Muni was very astonished.
A person who was half killing animals has now got such transformation of heart, he doesn't
wish to hurt even ants.
And then obviously, then he invited him, he washed their lotus feet.
And in this way, he offered proper respects and Narad Muni Parvat Muni then vanished from
that place.
So the understanding is simply by hearing the name of that person, many, many grossly
sinful people, everybody, they become purified.
So how is it possible that the person can be bad if simply by associating with his name,
such effects, such complete purification can be achieved?
How is it possible?
The devotees of that person are so good, simply by their association, association with his
name, fame, qualities, as soon as Krishna touched a prostitute, immediately all the
lust vanished from prostitutes mind.
So anybody who approaches Krishna for anything, Dhruva Maharaj, he was having so much greed
in his heart, he wanted a kingdom bigger than that of his father.
So as soon as he came in contact with Krishna, he became completely purified.
So when touch with Krishna's holy name, it makes a person good.
How the personality whose name is so pure, he can be impure.
So thus, God is all good.
His name is thus equally good.
And the one who is in constant touch with his holy name, he also becomes all good.
So now God is all good.
And still there is suffering, it means that suffering we have created.
The judge is good, judge is neutral, still somebody is being punished, why?
Because that person has broken the laws of nature, these people do not know.
How much ever they work hard, become famous, you get name, you get money, still sufferings
will continue.
Sufferings are because of entanglement.
Any action that we do, it is entangling, good or bad.
Good action means you will remain here to continue, to reap the results of those actions.
But then again, you have to take a new body, taking a new body means immense suffering
in the womb of mother, then diseases and old age and then suffering of death, separation
from your loved ones.
So this will continue to happen.
So that is why the entire Vedic civilization is how to take a person out of this entanglement.
These people do not know.
My backlog, I am carrying of so many karmas, I am suffering simply because of that.
And unless I get rid of my karmas, there is no possibility of unalloyed happiness.
You become billionaire or trillionaire.
You can become a good scholar, very famous, most intelligent, how much ever dumbbells
you do, you spend time in gym, you have cars and even aeroplanes, we will not be satisfied
because we have not got rid of the baggage of past karma.
As soon as we are free from that baggage, immediately we are happy.
So any sane person will immediately take to it.
So everything is very logical and very clear that yes, everyone is suffering and God is
good.
And I am suffering because of my karma and those people who follow this path, they become
completely happy.
So let me follow that now.
So coming out of this entanglement of karma is the aim of life.
So how to do that, that Krishna explains in the verses that we are going to see now.
Verse number 7.
So Krishna is explaining, we discussed in the last class how Karma Yoga is better than
Karma Sannyas.
Karma Sannyas means leaving your prescribed duties when you are completely self-satisfied,
not whimsically, not prematurely, when you are completely satisfied in yourself, then
such a person can leave doing his prescribed duties and completely dedicate to research
about absolute truth, read the Vedas, follow the process of Sankhya Yoga, Jnana and meditation.
But then a person who is advanced in knowledge, he understands the absolute truth being Krishna
and engages in his service.
This engagement in the service of Krishna, Krishna told, it is better than Karma Sannyas.
Now here Krishna is explaining the features of that Yoga Yukta, a person who is engaged
in Karma Yoga.
So Krishna is telling,
One who works in devotion, who is a pure soul and who controls his mind and senses is dear
to everyone and everyone is dear to him.
Though always working, such a man is never entangled.
So work is very dangerous.
That is why those people who do not have much knowledge, they want to shun all the material
work and go sit in the mountain and jungles.
But there are some people who are working, but still they are not entangled.
So for which kind of person that is possible, one who works in devotion, Yoga Yukta, who
is a pure soul.
So we want to become dear to everyone.
And in order to become dear to everyone, we are trying so many things, we work very hard
to satisfy a man or woman and we do so many sacrifices, we offer various gifts, spend
so much of our time, energy, money and consciousness.
Still it is not possible to have an unalloyed relationship and becoming dear to everyone.
However, here Krishna is telling this wonderful thing, how a person can become dear to everyone.
So very nicely in the Parport it is explained.
Because one who works in Krishna Consciousness is servant to all.
He is very dear to everyone.
Why a person in Krishna Consciousness is servant to all, Prabhupada is mentioned in the Parport
here.
Yatha taror mul nise chanena.
Just like you offer water to the root, the water is spread everywhere.
So you are benefactor of entire tree.
In a similar fashion, if somebody serves Krishna, then all the living entities are automatically,
you are acting as their servant.
So thus, one who works in Krishna Consciousness is servant to all, he is very dear to everyone.
Which kind of person we don't like?
Who doesn't act as servant?
If somebody is acting as your servant, whatever you are telling, he or she is obeying.
He or she never argues, never goes against your wish.
Who will not like such a person?
We don't like anybody when the person wants to lord over us, control us, impose something
upon us or does not agree with us.
So that is why sometimes when devotees were writing letters to Prabhupada about management
issues in the institution.
So Prabhupada wrote, simply if we maintain this servant attitude, we are calling others
Prabhu, we should also feel that they are all Prabhu.
So every devotee, if he thinks everyone is Prabhu, everyone is my master and I am servant,
simply this servant attitude will solve all the management problems.
So who is dissatisfied with a very obedient and servant means perfect servant.
What is the feature of a servant?
Even though the master may be sometimes harsh, the servant does not reply.
He tolerates and when the servant tolerates, then master also softens, even though he may
be ill tempered, short tempered, he sees I am scolding, but the servant does not respond.
He always takes everything very, very politely, humbly without replying in a harsh manner.
So the master also becomes very soft.
And in this way, the relationship continues.
Now in this world, everyone is being encouraged.
No, we should have equality.
This equality is never sanity, inequality, there is fight and disagreement.
So with the culture, there is no question of equality.
Somebody is always higher, somebody is always lower.
God is there, God guided Brahma, Shiva, Lakshmi, they are on a lower platform, Rudra, then
less than them, topmost is Brahmana, Vaishnava, Brahmana, then Brahmana will guide the kings,
Kshatriyas, they will guide the Vaishyas, they will guide Shudras.
In this way, a hierarchy is given everywhere.
So a company has a CEO and the company has got very, very nice business.
So a person can think if one CEO is producing so much result, let me hire one more CEO.
So what will happen to the company?
There are two CEOs in a company, it will break down, nothing will happen.
But now husband wife both want to become CEOs.
That is why the houses are breaking down.
So one has to take the role of a leader, one has to take the role of a servant.
So because a devotee, he does not think I'm master of everyone.
A person thinks, oh, I am servant of my family members.
They don't work according to me.
That is all right.
I should see that somehow or other they advance in service of Krishna.
Some people are not behaving, they are misbehaving with me.
That is all right.
Any kind of suffering is because of my past karma.
They are simply instruments.
If bad sound is coming out of tape recorder or these days phones, we don't become angry
upon phone or music player.
So that is simply an instrument.
So similarly, everyone is simply an instrument.
Ultimately, my karma is coming back to me.
So in this way, a person simply is always in a servant mood and understanding.
I meant here to serve everybody because everybody is part and parcel of Krishna.
The sea is very dear to everyone.
And Prabhupada gives wonderful understanding here.
And because everyone is satisfied by his work now, who is not satisfied by such a perfect
humble servant?
He is pure in consciousness.
And because he is pure in consciousness, his mind is completely controlled.
And because his mind is controlled, his senses are also controlled.
So many people want that trouble.
Please tell me how can I completely control my mind?
So here the answer is given.
You have to have a pure consciousness.
Who can have a pure consciousness when everyone is satisfied by your work?
If you give dissatisfaction to others, if you cause anxiety for others, automatically
anxiety will come to you.
This is called entanglement.
This call karma.
That is why one of the qualities of devotee is Chaitanya Mahaprabhu instructed a devotee
does not cause anxiety for any living entity.
So we should see that by my words, by my actions, is somebody getting anxiety?
Then I am not a devotee.
This is one of very important qualities of devotee, which Krishna would mention in 12
chapters again.
I'm very, very nice in deity worship.
I am very particular.
Mangala Aarti four o'clock, I'll be there in the temple for years.
And then I am following other things very, very nicely.
Shuchi mochi cleanliness, mantras, I'm expert in chanting.
But then I offend the devotees by my behavior.
People become anxious because of my behavior.
Then sabhakta prakrita smrita that devotee is not.
He has not even begun his spiritual life.
He's prakrita.
He is still there on material level, material platform.
Not that bhaktheshu chanyeshu, a person who does not understand the importance of other
devotees.
He's on a material platform.
So one very important feature of devotees, he is not the source of anxiety for anybody.
And he also does not become anxious by anybody's behavior.
He's a devotee.
Don't agitate others.
Don't become agitated.
So here how a person can have that?
Because everyone is satisfied by his work when he's in servant mode, then people are
satisfied.
They are not anxious.
So because he's not agitating others, he will also not be agitated.
So thus his consciousness remains pure and his mind is completely controlled in pure
consciousness.
Now my senses are very loose.
Prabhu, what to do?
Why senses are loose?
Mind is supposed to control the senses.
So here Prabhupada is explaining and because his mind is controlled, his senses are also
controlled.
If you have to control the senses, you have to control mind.
First of all, mind is the master of senses.
Because mind is controlled by the dint of pure consciousness, the senses are also controlled.
Because his mind is always fixed on Krishna, there is no chance of his being deviated from
Krishna nor is there a chance that he will engage in senses in matters other than the
service of the Lord.
He does not like to hear anything except topics related to Krishna.
He does not like to eat anything which is not offered to Krishna and he does not wish
to go anywhere if Krishna is not involved.
Therefore his senses are controlled.
So controlled senses means I will not watch anything, I will not eat anything.
That is not possible.
We will die.
So we have to watch something but I will not watch anything other than Krishna.
This is called control of eyes.
I have to visit some places so I will not visit anything other than the dham of Krishna.
I have to eat something, I will not eat anything other than the prasadam of Krishna.
So my tongue is controlled, everything is controlled.
Controlled senses are controlled and a man of controlled senses cannot be offensive to
anyone.
So here everyone is getting offended, sometimes we end up offending others.
Why do we end up offending?
Because our senses are not under control, we become angry, we become disturbed because
of this strong desire of the senses, uncontrolled senses, we become angry, agitated and we create
offenses and then reaction comes in the form of further offenses.
We get more disturbed, we create further offenses.
In this way we keep on getting entangled, we end up in hell.
So that is why Kali Yuga is called the age of quarrel and hypocrisy.
Why there is so much quarrel, so many offenses?
Because the senses of people are not controlled.
Sense control is very very important.
So when a person is having controlled senses, here Krishna writes, one who works in devotion
who is a pure soul and who controls his mind and senses is dear to everyone and everyone
is dear to him.
So if you have to become dear to everyone, then you have to control your mind and senses.
So very nice, beautifully Prabhupada explained.
And how this is possible?
Controlled senses is possible by controlled mind, controlled mind is possible by pure
consciousness.
Pure consciousness is possible when a person is in servant mode of everyone, he identifies
himself with everyone.
He does not identify himself with a particular family, particular nation, oh I am Sharma,
I am Agarwal, I am Das, I am Singh, I am XYZ, I belong to India or America, no, I belong
to everyone.
We are all part and parcel of Krishna.
Everyone is my family.
He does not distinguish.
And I am servant of everyone.
Everyone is serving Krishna, let me serve everyone.
So this is possible in Krishna consciousness.
A man who works in devotion, who is yogyukta.
So that is why we have to engage ourselves.
Prabhupada will simply always keep on chanting Hare Krishna Maha Mantra and engage yourself
in service of Krishna.
That's it.
So always keep constant touch with Krishna, then everything will be nice.
Whatever end we are trying to attain by material means, controlled mind, controlled senses,
dear to everyone, all these things are possible only by Krishna consciousness.
And such a man, although working superficially, Prabhupada explains, then Arjuna was offensive.
He did physical offence.
He killed so many people.
No, he was not offensive.
This is superficial because he was acting directly under the order of Krishna and the
souls were not harmed, rather they were benefited.
All of them, they got liberated who died on the battlefield.
So that was not offense, that was a help actually.
So such a man like Arjuna, who is strictly, whose senses are under control of Krishna,
so he is simply an instrument.
So instrument is not entangled.
If a soldier kills under the direction of government, 100 people, he will not be punished.
If a soldier kills the enemy without the sanction and order of his commander, he will be court
marshaled.
So that is because a devotee strictly follows the direction of Krishna, controls himself
in Krishna consciousness, so he is not at all entangled in the laws of Karma.
This is the way of remaining unentangled, strictly being Krishna conscious, following
the instructions of Krishna through the spiritual master.
So then when a person acts, how does he think?
He has to still eat, go, what is his consciousness?
So here, beautifully it is mentioned,
A person in the divine consciousness, although engaged in seeing, hearing, touching, smelling,
eating, moving about, sleeping and breathing, always knows within himself that he actually
does nothing at all.
Because while speaking, evacuating, receiving, opening or closing his eyes, he always knows
that only the material senses are engaged with their objects and that he is aloof from
them.
So a person immediately realizes when he is yoga yukta, I am different from this body.
So the actions of body are going on, body is walking, talking and sleeping, eyes, I
am opening, closing, evacuating, simply under the direction of Krishna for his service,
these things are going on.
But he is not doing anything.
So Prabhupada mentions, so I practically saw this from the behavior of my Guru Maharaj.
So devotee does like that, even though it is fixed, tomorrow you are going to go to
some place.
If somebody asks you, so you are going to go.
So it tells if Krishna desires, I may go because he strictly understands that everything is
under control of Krishna.
I cannot tell, yes, I am going, who are you to control?
How can you decide?
So Prabhupada, spiritual master, always he was telling if Krishna wishes, I will go there.
Are you going to do this thing?
If Krishna wishes, I will do this thing.
If Krishna controls me, Krishna makes me act, I will do that.
So this is the mood of a devotee.
He offers himself like a puppet.
Prabhupada wrote in the prayers, nachao, nachao, nachao se mathe, kashthera putthi, putthalikera,
just like a doll is there.
So doll is completely controlled.
In a similar fashion, devotee offers, Krishna, please control me.
Thus, although he is acting, his body is acting, his body is directly acting under the control
of Krishna.
Body is also maintained by Krishna.
Food is sent automatically by Krishna.
Everything is under control of Krishna.
So naiva kinchit karo mithi, I am not doing anything, Krishna is acting through my body.
This a devotee is able to perceive.
So even though he is acting, sometimes, sinfully, just like Arjuna.
People of one religion, they tell that Arjuna, Krishna, they have to suffer.
Krishna has to go to hell because so much of killing has happened.
But no, he is not at all entangled in papa, even though by committing so-called sinful
activities.
So thus we have to be firmly convinced, just like a cashier is totally convinced, there
is no question in his mind that I can take even one note from this money which I have
received.
In a similar fashion, whatever money I received by the dint of my mind and body, we should
be thoroughly convinced it does not belong to me.
Even my mind, my body, my relatives, my body, my mind, my family, nothing belongs to me.
Everything belongs to Krishna.
I have got these things so that I can use them in the service of Krishna.
So we should be thoroughly convinced.
If there is some attachment, some greed, oh, little money I can keep, let me take one note
to that degree our suffering begins in this world.
Brahmanyadhaya karmani, Krishna is telling sangam tyaktva karoti yaha.
Sangam tyaktva, leaving all the attachment, he is not at all attached to anything.
Everything belongs to Krishna.
I will take it to offer to Krishna.
So this conviction should be there.
Then there is no path, there is no further entanglement for me.
Just like we do our work very, very nicely in our office, but we are not attached to
the office.
I do as a matter of duty.
Similarly, all the activities of this world should be done very, very nicely, but without
attachment.
Okay, so I have to work and I don't, if I work in this consciousness, then I will not
be entangled.
Why to work at all then?
So here it is mentioned.
Why should we work?
Kaena means with the body, manasa means mind, buddhi means intelligent, indriya means senses.
The yogis abandoning attachment act with body, mind, intelligence, and even with the senses
only for the purpose of purification.
So here it is not told only a person who is sitting in the jungle with creepers grown
on his body, ant hill on his body, his senses are not at all working, intelligence not at
all working.
He's a yogi.
No, here it is telling the yogis abandoning attachment.
They act with body, mind, intelligence, and even with senses, yogi may move also talk
also eat also.
You cannot tell you are not yogi, only the Himalayan is a yogi, but they act for the
purpose of purification.
So this is very important.
So we have a culture of retirement, 50 years you retire, the age got increased to 60 years.
Now they are trying to increase to 70 because they have, they think, what will I do?
My body is fit.
I can work and get more money.
So foolish people do not understand retirement does not mean does not mean easy life and
comfortable life.
People would retire from material activities while the body is strong and stout at 50 years.
So that with that strong, strong and stout body, you can completely engage in the service
of Krishna.
Retirement means beginning of very, very hard work.
Material life, there is enjoyment.
It means first of all, it is vana prastha before that.
You go to jungle, visit pilgrimages, wife can be there, then sannyas, sannyas means
kutichak.
You go live in a kutih and dependence is not on Krishna.
You can take food from the family, then more hardship, bahudaka, then you cannot accept
food from the family.
Sannyas also has got four levels.
So all the ashramas have got gradual progression.
So then bahudaka, you go and beg from many places.
Then even more hardship, parivrajacharya, then you have to keep on traveling continuously.
You cannot stay at one place.
You have to travel and preach more hardship and then paramhansa, then so much hardship
is there.
And after taking sannyas, people would do rigorous tapasya.
Some people would stand in water and in chilled water, they would stand and so many other
kinds of tapasya are there.
They would not eat for so many days, not drink for so many days, not breathe eventually.
You have to increase hardship in life, do a lot of tapasya.
So to do this tapasya, this hardship, Goswamis, they took a lot of tapasya.
After retirement from their ministerial positions, they did not enjoy a comfortable life.
Rather, they reduced their eating and sleeping.
They were sleeping for half an hour, one hour or maximum two hours.
And they were engaged in rigorous physical and mental endeavor.
So nowadays, people think I have earned money and I will retire, do a foreign tour and enjoy
a luxurious life.
That will make you tamasic and depressed.
That is why old people are depressed and full of anxieties.
What will happen to my children, grandchildren, this thing, that thing, property, etc.
An old man's head is full of anxiety, Bhagavatam tells, and they are very depressed at times.
So inaction will make a person depressed and all kinds of anxieties, other things will
come.
Retirement is meant for activity.
Retirement is meant for intense hard work in the service of Krishna.
So that is why I was explaining in the last class, never plan your life, a comfortable
life.
A comfortable life will help us nowhere.
It will make us tamasic, Krishna will not be happy.
Hard work is required by hard work, satisfying Krishna.
This is called Krishna consciousness.
So yogis work very hard with body, with mind, intelligence and senses, but the purpose is
purification.
When you work for sense gratification, you become impure, rajas tamas increases in the
body.
And when you work only for the satisfaction of Krishna, you become sattvic, more and more
sattvic and purification increases in the body.
So please keep this point in mind.
Yogi has to act, act very, very hard, but only for the purpose of purification.
We honor prasadam for purification.
Our past sins are destroyed by honoring prasadam.
Materialist eats, he becomes more impure by taking that food.
He earns money, enjoys impure.
He earns money, uses in Krishna's service, it becomes pure.
And then what happens?
The steadily devoted soul attains unadulterated peace because he offers the result of all
activities to me, whereas a person who is not in union with the divine, who is greedy
for the fruits of his labor becomes entangled.
So any person who wants to enjoy the fruits of his activities, he becomes entangled.
And who is greedy?
I want to enjoy the result of activity for myself.
He becomes entangled in laws of karma, keeps on getting machines, broken machines and keeps
on suffering like this.
Whereas a steadily devoted soul, he attains unadulterated peace because he offers the
result of all activities to me.
As soon as you give up the results of your activity, you get unadulterated peace, not
peace for some time, nice tikim, unadulterated, completely peaceful.
So simply giving up the results makes a person very, very peaceful.
And when he works for Krishna, he gets positive happiness.
So giving up a result, people think, let me enjoy more result and then I'll become peaceful.
Oh, I have 10 billion dollars now.
Now I'm financially independent, you know, when you give up the result for Krishna, then
shanti maap noti automatically mind becomes peaceful.
These things people do not know.
You break the laws of nature, disturbance is his mind.
You simply keep on telling more lies, you will always be disturbed.
Lie creates disturbing effect in the mind.
Similarly, offer results to Krishna and there is immediate peace in the life.
So when embodied living being controls his nature and mentally renounces all actions,
he resides happily in the city of nine gates.
Neither working nor causing work to be done.
No, no, you should act according to your nature.
Follow your passion.
This is foolishness.
We have to control our passion, control our nature.
Passion will make us mad.
A person is very, very passionate.
Bhagavad Gita mentions he becomes mad in next life.
Sometimes in this life only they become mad.
So we have to control the nature.
Human life is meant for controlling the nature.
Animal can behave as per its nature.
So when embodied living being.
So you should see how much control you are getting in your life, how much change you
are able to bring in your nature.
This is very important.
So when the embodied living being controls his nature and mentally renounces all actions,
he resides happily in the city of nine gates.
This body city of nine gates, eyes are two gates, mouth, ears, lectum, anus.
So these are all gates of the body.
Just like a palace may have many gates.
And a rich man sits there and his workers are working like that.
So person is in Krishna consciousness.
He sits in this body very, very happily and the body is maintained, body is completely
happy, satisfied by the grace of Krishna because he's acting strictly under the direction of
Krishna.
He is not entangled, neither working nor causing the work to be done.
Everything is being done by Krishna.
So thus the summary is God is good because simply simply by chanting his name, you become
pure.
So the person is supreme, supremely good.
We become good simply by touching his holy name.
So why we are suffering?
We are suffering because of karma.
And some people from the birth, they have a bad body, disease body, it means I have
not acted.
Then why am I suffering?
It means I'm eternal, as simple as that.
So if we apply little, little common sense in small steps, we will understand everything.
We are eternal.
So if from birth somebody suffering and God is good, it means he would have acted sometime.
It means before birth, he has acted like that.
So we are eternal.
So we are eternal bodies, temporary intelligences, why to take such miserable bodies in which
dead disease, everything is inevitable.
Let me live without body in my spiritual state in the spiritual world.
So that is possible by Krishna consciousness.
