Vashishth Muni was keeping a cow so that he can perform the yajna, sacrifice very nicely.
And then this sage king was there, he went there and he was very hungry.
So he took some help from sage Vashishth, I'm very hungry, can you please help me?
So Vashishth told, yes, I can help you and the king was having an army.
And surprisingly Vashishth, although he was not expecting that much help can happen, but
he was able to prepare a sumptuous feast for his entire army.
And Vishwamitra got surprised, what is this?
This sage alone, he and his wife are there and such nice things they have prepared immediately,
what is this thing?
And then Vashishth told, no, actually I have this cow, Kaam Denu, Surabhi cow.
So there are some cows, spiritual cows, which can fulfill all your desires, whatever edibles
you want, all the wonderful dishes, no need to cook, arrange the ingredients, immediately
they'll come out, manifest from the cow.
This is another science.
So he was very shocked because such things we only hear in scriptures, but some powerful
personalities like Vashishth do possess them.
So he was very surprised and he told, oh, this such wonderful cow, what the cow is doing
in jungle and the king should have such cows, such a wonderful thing it would be.
And he told, Vashishth, you please give it to me, I am the king, I need to enjoy.
So Vashishth told, I cannot give you, please understand, I have to perform yajna, I need
to keep cow.
And then king told, he's not going to listen, a person becomes mad after material, just
imagine a cow which can produce whatever you want to eat immediately, who would not like
to possess?
So then king told his soldiers, forcefully let us take the cow away.
And although king was there with his army, soldiers, immediately entire army came out
and they defeated king's army, Vishwamitra's army.
And Vishwamitra was shocked, my God, not just edibles, this cow can produce soldiers also.
So what is this, living entities are coming and they are soldiers, they start fighting,
what is this science?
So he was very surprised and then he got to know that, that is why in the scriptures,
the brahmanas are given higher position than the kshatriyas.
So brahmana is very very powerful, but he does not displace power like that.
Because he is interested, he can control everything and anything.
Just like Bhagwata mentions example of, who was he?
Father of Maharaj Prithu, Vena Maharaj.
So Vena Maharaj was atheistic king.
So there was urgency of a king because his father, he got disgusted with the child son
he has got and he told what kind of son I have produced, then he went to jungle.
So now there was something required immediately.
So the sages installed him on the throne, at least some ruler should be there.
And then he was an atheist, he was telling, I am God, don't do yajna for Krishna, you
do it for me.
And the sages were so powerful, simply by their words, they killed that king immediately.
So such was the power of the brahmanas.
So brahmanas are very very powerful, but they are engaged in a very serious business in
the service of Krishna and for the welfare of entire society by engaging them in the
service of Krishna.
Brahmanas guide the kings, rulers, and the rulers guide everyone, through Vaishyas, Shudras,
everyone is guided.
So in this way entire civilisation society is directed towards self-realisation, towards
love of God.
So brahmanas, although they have tremendous power, they can control everything, but they
do not use that.
They don't have any time to engage this power in controlling and all that.
So then he realised, so these brahmanas are very very powerful, my kshatriya power is
nothing.
Such big army I have, it got defeated like anything.
And he did not use any personal power, simply his cow has defeated me.
So what to speak of this brahmana?
So then he told, I have to become brahmana now.
So if a person works hard, he can become a brahmana and human life is meant for becoming
brahmana.
So what is brahmana?
We can see Vishwamita Kshatriya is becoming brahmana now, he became eventually a brahmana.
So it is not by birth, just like an engineer can become a lawyer if he qualifies himself
or a lawyer can become engineer by suitable qualifications.
In a similar fashion, a person can become brahmana.
It may take many many lives, but if a person is wise, everybody who has got a human form
of life, he will try to elevate as soon as possible to brahmana platform and transcend
that to become a Vaishnava.
He is able to understand himself that he is different from the body.
Unless somebody is a brahmana, he will not be able to realize that he is not the body.
So he told, I will become brahmana now, it is very very important.
And then I will become so Vashishtha has insulted me, I will become brahmana as powerful, more
powerful than Vashishtha and then I would defeat him.
So then he started practicing now, what you have to do to become brahmana?
So the greatest difficulties are controlling material desires and anger.
So Vishwamitra went into penance and he because how a person advances, how he has material
beauty, material opulence, education, riches, it is by tapasya, by charity.
So tapasya brings a person lot of material advancement in life.
So when a person starts doing rigorous tapasya, Indra becomes worried because Indra has done
lot of tapasya to get to that position.
Just like here also, if you want any good job, you have to do tapasya, clear so many
exams, study so much, similar thing.
For elevation into higher bodies, there are some tapasya which are recommended in the
Vedas.
So Indra thinks, so if he does tapasya, he will take my position, he will become Indra.
If nobody is there, Indra will continue.
So Indra then wanted to disturb and thus Indra sent some society girls from heavenly planets
and they came and they started disturbing Vishwamitra and he got disturbed eventually.
And thus he fell for material desires.
And then again, he started endeavoring very, very hard.
So Vishwamitra is a great example of perseverance.
Even though you lose your spiritual status, again you work very hard.
So Srila Prabhupada says, do not worry.
You are working, advancing in spiritual life, there would be some setback in spiritual life
also because spiritual life is a war against the illusory energy which is called Maya.
So do not worry about the setbacks.
Keep persevering.
Start following the rules and regulations again.
So then Vishwamitra followed and then anger came, again he fell down.
So anger is very, very dangerous.
Immediately entire body becomes polluted with tamoguna and otherwise also we know bad hormones
are released and all the diseases and other things they happen in angry mood.
So it is a principle of Ayurveda.
Keep a very jolly happy mood and then you will avoid all diseases.
Even modern science also agrees 90% of diseases are psychosomatic means they have their origin
in mind.
There are very famous works describing the powers and intricacies of subconscious mind
by which people are able to actually come out of some chronic diseases as well.
And Srila Prabhupada also corroborated, yes, 90% of illness happens because of mind.
But you need not now start studying some subconscious mind books because we are working at a much
deeper level.
Mind is intelligence.
Beyond intelligence is soul and we are working at that spiritual level.
So it is much, much more powerful and that is the root cause of all manifestations.
So Vishwamitra became very much disturbed.
Once he fell down because of not able to control material desires, then he fell down because
of inability to control anger.
So these things are taking away all the peace from our life.
No person situation is taking away the peace.
So I have some material desires, desires to enjoy my senses directly.
So for that I have to work very, very hard and thus there is no peace in life.
Why people are disturbed?
Because they have to travel in local every day, two hours, three hours, four hours.
And then you attend your college or attend your office, work very hard and then such
hard work disturbs the peace.
And then he's not able to spend time with the people he want to, again there is disturbance
of peace.
So why it is happening?
Because of material desires.
So that if I don't have material desire, then there is no need for so much hard work.
But material desires are pushing me and then when desires are not fulfilled, anger arises.
So thus I am not disturbed because of any other thing, I am simply disturbed because
of anger and material desires.
So a person on the path of liberation, Brahmana, is supposed to control these things, anger
and material desires.
So when we advance in spiritual life, then we realize that without anger, that with anger
immediately we fall down on the spiritual status.
However, a devotee can show anger and a devotee must show anger.
This is very important.
A person who is not on bhakti yoga, if he shows anger, then he will fall down.
But a bhakti yogi in some specific cases for the service of Krishna, he has to show anger,
otherwise he will fall down.
Because the scriptures are mentioning, just like here you are reading, anger is also doorway
to hell.
Lust, anger and greed, three gorgeous gates to hell.
But a devotee Bhagavatam mentions, if Krishna is being insulted or devotee is being harmed
or insulted and he does not become angry, then he falls down on his spiritual platform.
Because bhakti yoga is a process of directly engaging in the service of Krishna, relationship
with Krishna.
So a devotee has to show anger in such situations for protecting the interest of Krishna, devotees
or his movement.
Otherwise for himself, devotee also should not take any offense.
Person is cursing him, abusing him, torturing him or even killing him.
He always wishes well for his torturers, for his killers, for abusers, for anybody.
That is the mood of a devotee.
But as far as other Vaishnavas or Krishna or his mission is concerned, if anybody is
doing harm to him, then he should not take any offense.
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Ram, Hare Ram, Ram, Ram,
Hare Hare.
Again disruption.
Okay, so don't lose your calm, don't get carried away by anger on other things.
So let us continue.
So for personal self, devotee does not take any offense.
So this is not easy.
Is it easy?
You will tell, Prabhu, it is so difficult.
How can we avoid anger?
How can we avoid material desire?
So many desires are there, impossible to become desireless.
Yes, it is virtually impossible.
That is why an extraordinary kind of endeavor is required to control anger and material
desires.
And what is that?
Now Krishna is going to explain.
So Krishna very beautifully explaining step by step the process of advancement.
The first step is you start giving up the results of your activity.
Don't become greedy to enjoy whatever you produce out of your actions.
Then a person gets some sanity and mind becomes little purified and he's able to understand,
cultivate transcendental knowledge.
And when he advances in transcendental knowledge, then he has to do this thing, which Krishna
is describing now at the end of the fifth chapter, which Krishna describes elaborately
in the next chapter, Sankhya Yoga.
So what a person has to do now.
Now he has realized controlling anger is very, very important.
He has advanced on the level of Jnana.
Now this process.
What is that?
What does it mean?
Shutting out all external sense objects as we discussed previously.
A person should not contact with any of the external senses.
A person should not see anything.
Person is endeavoring to control anger and desire.
Should not see anything.
Should not hear.
And keeping the eyes and vision concentrated between the two eyebrows, suspending the inward
and outward breaths within the nostrils, thus controlling the mind, senses and intelligence,
the transcendentalist becomes free from desire, fear and anger.
One who is always in this state is certainly liberated.
So shutting out all external sense objects, very, very difficult.
A person is not supposed to taste anything.
He is not supposed to see anything, not supposed to hear anything.
So how does it happen?
Not immediately.
Slowly a person has to reduce.
So when he starts doing all this, this is called Ashtanga Yoga, Sankhya Yoga, Yam, Niyamas and Pranayama.
If a person follows nicely under the guidance of spiritual master, slowly he is able to
reduce the material desires.
Initially, just like example is given of Dhruv Maharaj.
So he was just eating when he started doing Tapasya.
He was just eating some leaves and grass.
He was sustaining on this.
And then he started eating in gap of few days.
And then he stopped eating.
He was just drinking water.
And gradually he was drinking water in interval of few days or a week.
And then he stopped drinking water.
And he was just living on breath.
And then he advanced even further.
He was breathing in an interval of a week or so.
Then 12 days, then increased it even more.
And then he stopped breathing.
So when he stopped breathing, the universal air started getting disturbed and all the
living entities started choking up.
So just see this much power, a small infinitesimal Jiva living entity wields that he can make
the entire universe suffocate.
Similarly, Hiranyakashapu when he was doing similar Tapasya, so much fire started emanating
from his head, entire universe started becoming heated up by that fire.
So much power this small spirit soul has got.
But because this body is covering that spirit soul, all that power is covered, that is not
exhibited.
So the more a person advances on this spiritual path, so all these powers are revealed gradually.
So slowly a person is able to, not immediately, gradually a person reduces interaction with
the sense objects and then he shuts down completely all the external sense objects.
And the eyes are closed, closing the eyes completely is not recommended.
So many people these days, they in the yoga practice, as I've explained before, they completely
close the eyes.
And I also had some experience in this.
I was practicing some other yoga in which two and a half hours you have to completely
close the eyes and meditate.
So some people can meditate, otherwise most of the times people do fall asleep.
So then I noticed when we are doing this sadhana in a group, I noticed my instructor and she
was sitting in a very unique position with head hanging downwards.
And I thought, oh, wow, this is very unique meditation.
What is this asana?
I've never learned about it.
Maybe when I advance, they will teach me this also.
And then I went to a different camp where you have to meditate for days together without
talking, without speaking, without any even nonverbal contact communication, no communication
at all.
And entire day you have to simply meditate, meditate and meditate.
And then I saw many, many more people doing like this.
The head is hanging down.
I thought, oh, this is really I should I want to learn this.
And eventually I realized that all those people were sleeping, they could not even
maintain an erect posture.
So this is what happens when you close the eyes.
So that is why Krishna also is telling here and he will explain further in the next chapter
Sankhya Yoga.
So the eyes and vision should be concentrated between the two eyebrows like this and I should
be half closed.
Fully closed means a person would fall asleep, there are chances.
And thus mind is controlled, senses are controlled.
You follow proper breathing process, there is a technique by which controlling these
airs within the body, a person is able to control his mind, senses, intelligence, and
the senses are also made silent by this process.
And then a person becomes free from desire, anger, and also fear.
So just see we have so much fear.
So this fear also can be controlled, thus a yogi is fearless.
Just imagine in the dead of night in jungles, where nobody is there to protect him, he does
not have any weapons, even sufficient clothing, he is just sitting and sitting and sitting.
How he has attained such fearlessness.
So this is possible by this yoga practice.
And one who is always not sometimes always in this state, he is liberated.
So very, very difficult to this much.
So this is what the Rishis were doing.
And then there was disruption in their sadhana.
Some Apsara has come, some other disturbance is there, and they got disturbed.
So then Lord Krishna recommends an easy process by which all these things, gymnastics, we
can avoid very, very easily.
So what is that process that Lord Krishna explains now in the last verse, the last verse
of every chapter is very, very important in the Bhagavad Gita.
So here Krishna tells, so need not follow all this elaborate process for attaining peace.
So here we do this thing.
Bhoktaaram yajna tapasam sarva loka maheshwaram, suridam sarva bhutaanaam gyatvaa maam shantimrachati.
So please read the translation very carefully.
The sages knowing me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and austerities, the supreme
lord of all planets and demi-gods and the benefactor and well-wisher of all living entities
attain peace from the pangs of material miseries.
So ultimately what after doing this dhyana, this meditation, what you are supposed to
attain, you are supposed to come to this knowledge.
So then the process of yoga becomes complete.
So Krishna started explaining with karma yoga, giving up the results of your activities,
then transcendental knowledge, after transcendental knowledge, meditation he has explained.
And after meditation, when the senses are completely silent, a person rises to spiritual
platform.
So how you can be on mental platform when you are obviously your gross senses are not
engaged.
If your eyes are watching some movie, your tongue is tasting some nice dish, you cannot
contemplate, you cannot be on mental platform.
At night when a person is all the gross senses are not active, he goes to dream, a mental
platform when the gross senses are inactive.
Similarly, the mental platform also needs inactivity.
So when the mental platform is completely silent, otherwise person is full of doubts.
When there are no doubts, there is no fear, there is no desire, there is no anxiety and
the gross senses are also silent, then a person can reach spiritual platform.
Then on the spiritual platform, this truth is realized that Krishna, three truths about
Krishna are explained in this word, Bhoktaram Yajna Tapasam, Sarvalok Maheshwaram and Suridam
Sarvabhuta Naam.
So first of all Bhoktaram means enjoyer.
So I take lot of hardship here, everyone has to take hardships in this material world.
But all those hardships we take for myself.
Why because I think if I take these hardships, then I am having dissatisfaction in life.
And I think this dissatisfaction in life is because of some sense objects that I am missing.
I am missing some name and fame in society.
So let me have some name and fame and then I think I would be satisfied.
I am missing some material comforts in my life.
Let me have those material comforts and I'll be satisfied.
I am missing some person in my life, my better half.
If I have that, then I would be satisfied.
So this is called anartha or unwanted things.
A person does not know why he is dissatisfied.
But this is a fact.
We all have some dissatisfaction in this material world.
So to fulfill that dissatisfaction, to come out of that dissatisfaction, a person is endeavoring
helplessly just like a hungry person.
He is eating whatever, putting whatever he's seeing in his mouth.
And in this way, sometimes he puts poison in his mouth and he dies.
So similarly, in the name of an endeavor to become satisfied, a person is putting poison
of independent sense enjoyment.
And this is dissatisfaction perpetually continues and rather increases.
So why a person is dissatisfied is explained.
So a person is dissatisfied because he has forgotten this fact, the fact that Krishna
is the ultimate enjoyer.
And just like we are working in the company.
So we don't have to forget that boss is the ultimate enjoyer.
The company is running for his satisfaction.
But if I try to satisfy my boss very, very nicely, I automatically get satisfied.
He gives me that is why people work very hard.
But I should not forget the company is not running for my satisfaction.
It is running for boss satisfaction.
If I comply by him, then I will also be so much rewarded.
So the entire world, all the activities are only for the satisfaction of Krishna.
He's the ultimate enjoyer and Sarvaloka Maheshwaram.
How he can enjoy because he's the proprietor.
He has created everything.
Everything should be for the interest of the proprietor.
I am not the proprietor.
Some money, wealth, any some property goes away from me.
I become disturbed.
So why do I become disturbed?
Why do I lose my peace of mind?
Because I think it is my property, but this is not fact.
Here Krishna is telling it is Krishna's property, Sarvaloka Maheshwaram.
He's a proprietor.
I have got those things and I should use this thing for the maintenance of myself.
Rest everything should be used in the service of God.
And Suridam Sarva Bhutanam.
Now God is at dawn.
He wants to take some hafta like they would take in Mumbai sometime back.
And now also they are collecting in some places.
He is like a big gangster who is trying to dominate us.
He's telling no, you work for my satisfaction.
You do this thing.
No.
Then Krishna explains this third knowledge is also very important.
Suridam Sarva Bhutanam, Suridam means best well-wisher.
He's best well-wisher of all of us.
He's not an autocrat.
So his situation is just like that of a father.
Why does a father produce kids or why does he expand a family?
That family was not existing, but then the man puts in place a family and then some children
are produced.
Why all those things are there?
It is for his satisfaction.
And if everyone in the family, they work with the cooperation of the head of the family,
they all enjoy and actually the father is not willing to enjoy independently.
His enjoyment is in the enjoyment of the family, but family should comply by him.
So the simple thing Krishna is explaining to us, this is what we forget in life.
So all the ignorance, all the unhappiness in life is simply because of ignorance of one's
relationship with God.
Just like we have a relationship with the person if that relationship is forgotten and
a glimpse of it, all of us can see in this material world.
That's why you're speaking to a devotee this afternoon.
You told yes, yes, Prabhu, I've experienced we all have experienced this thing when a
person falls in love, then it does not care for what is happening at the gross level and
he's willing to sacrifice everything.
So we have seen in movies, we have seen in real life also.
So that is just a glimpse of Krishna's pleasure.
That is why human form of life is so important.
We can understand the concepts of spiritual life, we can get a glimpse of it.
So just like here in the infatuation, which is taken as love, a person is able to attain
a state of not getting disturbed by any of the upheavals, rather he is willing to sacrifice
everything for the object of love.
But suppose that person loses memory and he forgets his relationship with the object of
his love, then it is not possible for him to remain undisturbed by sense objects.
Then he'll go back to have some comfort in life, eat nice things and do all that.
But when he falls in love and for the satisfaction of his love, a person can forgo eating, sleeping,
enjoyment, property, wealth, and any association of his friends and everything he can sacrifice.
So when I was outside, so I saw a movie and in that movie, the actor is being glorified.
Why is he getting glorification?
So people are praising that, see this person, how much sacrifice he has done.
He could have done anything in life, could have achieved anything in his life, but he
sacrificed everything for the love of his life.
So nobody told him that you, you nonsense person, you spoiled your life and you could
have done so much thing.
You could have done public welfare.
No, love is so much glorified here, sense satisfaction.
What the same activity for person does for Krishna, he will be criticized left and right.
Oh, you escapist, you nonsense person, you are not doing your duties, you're not doing
for anything.
But if the same person is done for a girl or a boy or glorified for love, you have sacrificed.
So just see this is called no common sense or ignorance.
When a person is doing that for all glorious Lord, it is difficult to digest for ordinary
people because we are all envious of God.
We all want to become God here.
However, it is easy to understand when a person is having a relationship, when that relationship
is that he can give up everything in a similar fashion.
We need not fit things left and right and we already have a relationship with God.
That is why Prabhupada, so then I realized, oh yes, this statement is correct simply because
of our forgetfulness of intimate relationship that we already have with God.
All these problems are existing on material platform.
This infatuated infatuation is so captivating.
Just imagine on a spiritual level what would be the effect of that love.
So when a person by this process of yoga karma yoga, Gyan yoga, Dhyana yoga, finally bhakti
yoga, that relationship is revealed, then a person just like a person who is in relationship
simply by thinking about his object of love, simply by chanting his name or her name, they
are satisfied.
In a similar fashion, when we revive our relationship with Krishna, simply by chanting his name,
thinking of him, engaging in service and taking all the hardships for him, a person always
24 hours he's able to remain in ecstasy.
But somehow or the other, if the relationship is forgotten, then all that pleasure is finished
immediately and the person falls down for material enjoyment.
So that's if you want peace in life, it is not possible by any kind of material adjustment
which bring only temporary relief.
We have to work hard strenuously under the guidance of a devotee who has revived his
relationship with Krishna.
He's called a pure devotee, spiritual master.
So if you follow Srila Prabhupada very, very nicely and under his guidance, very strictly
we do sadhana bhakti.
It is like following the prescription of doctor.
We have to be very, very strict, very disciplined.
Then we will also be able to revive this relationship and understand, oh, Krishna is a supreme proprietor.
I am his family member and I have this relationship with him and all my activity should be only
for his enjoyment.
So then we will attain peace.
And even if we have not attained that, this is the way of doing it.
So whenever we are doing any activity, please think by this activity, I will be satisfied
or Krishna would be satisfied.
If Krishna is satisfied, let me be dissatisfied also.
Arjuna took all dissatisfaction for the satisfaction of Krishna, who is satisfied by killing his
family members, killing his own father, grandfather, Arjuna did that, who is satisfied by killing
crores of people.
Even a person who was having a stone heart like Ashoka, his heart also got melted by
seeing so much of killing.
And thus he left everything, renounced fighting for good.
But the Pandavas, especially Yudhishthira Maharaj and all of them, pure devotees having
a soft heart, they did not budge an inch for such killing because Krishna told it is necessary
this killing at this point of time.
So for the satisfaction of Krishna, they were doing so much of killing and they took so
much of personal discomfort.
So we have to also follow similar thing in life.
Yes, such test we will not be put to that is meant for advanced devotees.
But in any decision in life, please never think about your material thing.
We have seen enough, isn't it?
It does not satisfy.
Think how I can, how Krishna is satisfied by this decision.
And always think I am not the proprietor of my property, Krishna is a proprietor.
And please do not get scared by following the instructions of Krishna.
Krishna is declaring he is a well-wisher also.
So simply if a person keep these three things in mind, Krishna is the enjoyer of all the
activities.
My family is there, they are not following my instructions.
So let me part my ways with them, no.
So then you're thinking you are the enjoyer of your family.
No, you're not the enjoyer.
The enjoyer of family is also Krishna.
Family means a group of people who are living together simply for the satisfaction of Krishna.
So if a person has to work also and a person has to cook also and take care of children,
how it is possible?
So a group of people, they come together, they divide the rules.
Okay, you take care of children, I will go out and work.
You cook and offer to the Lord, I'll arrange other things for the Lord.
In this way they are engaging in the service of Lord.
And then you need more devotees for the pleasure of Krishna to spread this knowledge.
Then a nice devotee child is produced for the satisfaction of Krishna.
So family is a small institution in which people come together for satisfaction of Krishna.
So if you think family is now there as we think for my satisfaction, then there would
be no peace.
There would always be fight and chaos.
And if you make Krishna as a center of coming together, then there would be peace.
If you are working in your office and you think it is for your satisfaction, so you
would be dissatisfied.
Sometimes the work is not
