We saw in the last class how a self-realized soul, he does not consider anything as good and bad in this material world.
It is only mental concoction in illusion a person thinks badra and abhadra, this thing is good and other thing is bad.
Whereas person who is in knowledge, for him it is the same, he is situated in equanimity.
So Chaitanya Charita Amrita says it is a mistake to tell something is good and other thing is bad in this material world.
Good and bad both are signs of the same coin.
As soon as a person dies, you lament and when the person takes birth, you rejoice.
So this rejoicing and lamentation, they come together. It is not possible a person has taken birth.
If somebody has taken birth, death is certain. So why don't we see the simple fact that happiness and distress are part of the same coin.
So unalloyed happiness is not possible in this world. As soon as a person gets some happiness, there is already a distress attached to it.
Birth and death, happiness, distress, they come together.
So a self-realized person, he perfectly understands everyone is a prisoner here, everyone is strongly conditioned by his body.
So he understands everything is bad here. So called good and bad, everything is bad.
In a prison house, as long as you are captured, you are in a bad situation.
Somebody could be in worse situation, other could be in less worse situation, but all are suffering in the prison.
In a similar fashion, we are all suffering here to different degrees.
And every living entity, sometimes it will suffer more, sometimes it will suffer less, sometimes it will go up, sometimes it will go down.
So when they attain self-realization, then they see everybody helplessly acting as per the bodies they have acquired with very, very little freedom.
Some freedom is available in human form of life.
If a person doesn't use it properly for doing tapasya in the service of Supreme Lord, then that chance is also missed.
He wastes it in sense enjoyment.
So Srila Prabhupada explains here,
Those whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity have already conquered the conditions of birth and death.
They are flawless like Brahma and thus they are already situated in Brahma.
What does it mean? Those whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity, they understand everything is same.
Everybody's spirit soul thinking that here is a tiger in front of me or here is a human being, they are different, that is ignorance.
These are simply dresses machines. Ultimately, the driver of both these machines is same.
But the driver is so maddened, intoxicated and hallucinated, he is thinking I am this dress, I am tiger if I am wearing the dress of a tiger.
I am intelligent, I am dull, I am Indian, I am American, I am Chinese.
So those whose minds are established in sameness, no, no, it is all Brahma, it is all spirit soul.
They are flawless like Brahma, they are situated in Brahma.
So now we are situated in this material energy, gross energy, we are on gross platform.
When we are dreaming at night, we are on mental platform, subtle platform.
Similarly, there is another platform which is called Brahma, which means spiritual platform and we are actually spirit soul.
So unless we live on a spiritual platform, even though we are in this material body, we can be either on gross platform,
enjoying bodily happiness or we can be enjoying mental happiness or we could be enjoying Brahma, spiritual happiness.
So either we have to go to spiritual world or we have to be on spiritual platform.
Then a person can be happy.
So if a person is always situated in such equanimity and sameness, then that person has already conquered the conditions of birth and death.
So this body will continue as long as this momentum is there, just like the current for the fan we are not supplying by turning off the switch.
But because of the previous current, it has got the fan moves for some time.
So liberated soul may not immediately come out of the body.
Liberated means just like the coconut gets ripened, it is there within the shell, but it is detached from the shell inside in a similar fashion.
The soul sees itself different from this body and understands the body will continue for some time as long as it is destined to it has got the force by the past karma.
But I'm not going to take another body unless required for the service of Krishna.
So they see themselves as completely different from this body.
So they are situated in Brahma platform, spiritual platform.
So what are the symptoms of a person who is situated in such spiritual platform?
Anybody can claim. Yes, yes, I am also Brahma realized.
So that Lord Krishna explains in the second shloka.
So we can see how much spiritually situated we are by reading this shloka.
What is that shloka?
Text number 20.
A person who neither rejoices, means to rejoice.
Means to attain, means something which is dear to you or pleasant for the senses.
A person who neither rejoices upon achieving something pleasant nor laments upon obtaining something unpleasant,
who is self-intelligent, unbewildered and who knows the science of God is to be understood as already situated in transcendence.
So all the festivals that we are celebrating.
Now slowly they are losing their significance.
On some festivals, very important festivals like Shri Krishna Janmashtami, we do not have holiday at all.
Some festivals we do have optional holidays.
But there are few days on which entire nation is compulsorily on holiday.
They are called national festivals.
And which are those days? We have three days.
Republic Day, Independence Day, Gandhi Jayanti.
Why these three days have been given more importance than any other festival that we have in the country?
Because they are all connected to our independence, freedom.
So every living entity wants freedom, wants liberation.
So it is not that a materialist is after a different aim and a spiritualist is after a different aim.
That is why Lord Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita,
Every person is following my path only.
Some people know what is the destination, what I am looking for, where will I get that?
Some people do not know.
But everyone is looking for the same thing.
Everyone wants eternal life.
Nobody wants to die.
Chit means everyone wants complete knowledge.
That is why they are taking advantage of the inquisitiveness,
creating new new suggestions for videos, for news, basis your inquisitiveness.
We all want to know what is happening.
We all want to know what is happening.
We all want to know what is happening.
We all want to know what is happening.
We all want to know what is happening.
Then we are looking for videos for news, basis your inquisitiveness.
We all want to know what is happening.
And Ananda, we all want pleasure.
So we want three things, Satchit and Ananda.
But what is that Satchitananda?
Satchitananda vigraha.
Ishwara, Paramaha, Krishna.
Lord Brahma tells.
Actually that Satchitananda, the source of all Satchitananda is Lord Krishna himself.
So we are all looking for Krishna.
But we do not know.
The materialist also is after independence, he does not want to follow any rules.
That is why sometimes children become rebellious.
Parents want them to follow some rules, they don't want to follow any rules.
They want to enjoy without any restriction.
But we have to realize, yes, freedom we want, independence we want.
But where is actual independence?
As we saw in the previous session, how much freedom do we have?
Srila Prabhupada gave example, those who could not hear in the last class, our freedom is
just like a prisoner, a criminal.
Sometimes the kings would give punishment, his head would be dunked inside the water.
And just when he is suffocating, he is lifted out.
His face is lifted out.
And then freedom is given.
If you want, you can breathe.
Inside the water, no freedom.
And outside the water also, freedom is not there.
Only freedom to breathe is there.
That's it.
And of course, that breathing itself is a great relief for the person.
He is waiting.
When will I come out?
When they will allow me to take my head out.
So that is the happiness that a person enjoys in this material world.
So much struggle for little happiness, just like a drop of water for a person in desert.
So this much freedom we have, very, very little freedom in the human form of life.
That too also very little.
Now also we are helpless.
As we discussed in the last class, different bodies we have, the body will have different
desires.
Now you have choice to go or not to go.
Human body you have, you will feel hungry.
Now you want to eat or you don't want to eat, some freedom is there given to you.
So there also we don't have much freedom.
So very, very little freedom.
And then too, if we wrongly use, now we want to increase our independence in this imprisonment,
in this material dress.
Then what happens?
We become even more shackled tightly.
We become the servant of our senses.
So the more you want to in this material world, the more you want to get independence without
surrendering to God, the more you become entangled, the more you become dependent.
So I want to serve my eyes also, I want to serve my ears also, I want to serve my tongue
also.
Helplessly so much hard work I am doing, but all the hard work, the tongue is taking away.
I eat something nicely in a nice restaurant and all my hard earned money goes away in
a few minutes or similarly so many senses, so much sense enjoyment is there.
So they are pushing me to hard work just to serve the senses only I am working hard.
If a person does not have any special extraordinary desire for sense enjoyment, I tell the boys
who live in the hostels here in this IIT which is close to us, these are worst in the country,
very small rooms.
So I tell them when you successfully lived here for four or five years and you were not
in depression, you were having an okay life.
So can you not continue in the same room for your entire life?
What is the need of unnecessary expanding the desires?
So when you expand your desires, you become conditioned.
So here Lord Krishna is explaining what should be the mood, what is the sign of a self-realized
soul who is actually independent, liberated, he is not at all servant of his senses.
He does not rejoice upon achieving something pleasant.
So if I get something pleasant, I get very good marks, if I become very rich, if I get
the person of my desire, if I get the position of my desire, then if I am becoming happy,
it means I am not self-realized, I am in ignorance.
Few things are not pleasant to us, I get some disease, I get some financial suffering, I
get some suffering in the family and I become disturbed by that, I lament because of some
sufferings.
I am not self-realized, I am in ignorance.
So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, he was visited by a nice brahmana, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu when
he was living with his mother.
And he served the brahmana very nicely and the brahmana became very happy.
He blessed Chaitanya Mahaprabhu as we have the general blessing, may you have a happy
married life.
So that is the advice, the blessings given to, we take the trips of bachelors to Vrindavan.
So you go to Ramandreti, there is a place.
So there they will do some rituals, the local pandas over there, the devotees and then they
will bless, may you have a good family life, so this is a general blessing.
So when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu heard this blessing, he immediately closed his ears, oh my god,
have you spoken, happy family life, there is a great entanglement.
So then he became angry, oh you are offending me, I am giving you some benediction and you
are not accepting, may you never have a happily married life.
And then Chaitanya Mahaprabhu wrote, oh that is very nice, that is good, that is blessing
in this world.
So anyway, nobody can be happy here, but somehow because of past karmas, sometimes a person
may have a span of less disturbance, which is taken as happiness, but when a person is
undisturbed for some reasons, there is no impetus to follow spiritual life, thus the
wise souls, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, he told, oh what you are telling, it is a curse, you
are telling to remain happy in this world.
And there is another similar prayer, which if you have read Bhagavatam, heard some lectures,
you know Kunti Maharani, Kunti Maharani prays, that my dear Krishna, please give me more
and more miseries, she is telling I am attached to, a woman is attached to two sides, one
is the biological family, another side is in-laws, children's family.
So children are there and parents are there, two attachments are there.
So for Kunti Maharani, similarly she was connected to two sides, Pandu, Pandavas and Vrishnis.
So usually we pray for, you know, let me live with my family, why I am not able to have
their association, but what Kunti Maharani is telling, Kunti Maharani is praying, Krishna
Krishna, please, please cut my knots of attachment with Vrishnis as well as Pandavas and please
give me more and more miseries because in miseries we remember you and remembering you
means seeing you always means no more seeing this material world.
So those people who are in knowledge, they actually strive, they pray to Krishna, Krishna,
let there be more and more miseries.
So Srila Prabhupada tells if there is no misery, misery may not be there at times, still a
devotee voluntarily accepts miseries and those miseries are called austerities or tapasya.
That is why we recommend, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu recommended, he just begged for one boon from
his mother and Chaitanya Mahaprabhu requested, fell at the feet of his mother, he told my
dear mother, please just give me one boon, he told my dear son, what is that, I will
give you everything and he told just one thing, please you give me, please observe
every Ekadashi very religiously and she told, but I also should follow, I am a widow.
There is some, there was some understanding in Navadvipa in Bengal that time that widow
should not follow Ekadashi, but Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Supreme Lord himself, he told
how Ekadashi is so important, should be followed by everybody.
So he requested, yes mother, you please follow and the mother agreed.
So Ekadashi, following Ekadashi, fasting, this is very, very important, is the most
important fasting for advancement in spiritual life, voluntarily not accepting food, taking
some hardship, we do long parikramas, so much hardship, we climb so many mountains to have
darshan, that is hardship, getting up early in the morning, brahmurta, taking cold water
bath always in every season is a hardship, so like this, some hardships we have to undergo,
some austerities, no meat eating, no intoxication, no gambling, no illicit sex, those who are
addicted to it could be hardship, but it is very, very important, this is called tapasya.
So a devotee does not limit upon obtaining something unpleasant, so a devotee is always
equally situated, as we discussed, when he is having so-called unfavorable situations
from material point of view, he uses it for internal purification, when there is materially
comfortable situation, he uses it for paropakar, for spreading Krishna consciousness to other
people, but he is not at all disturbed by either situation, he knows how to make best
use of both the situations.
And he is self-intelligent, what is the meaning of self-intelligent?
He knows what is the self, self means I am different from this body, and I am part and
parcel of Krishna.
So on this bodily platform a drama is going on, and drama means some temporary role, that
is not a permanent role, so a person could be very rich, but in drama he can become a
pauper, but should he cry, I have lost all my money and he should come in depression,
no, for time being I am a pauper, I will become rich very soon, I have lot of money in my
life.
In a similar fashion, a liberated soul, self-realized person understands that this life is just
like a drama, in this drama I have some people around me whom I call brother, sister, and
boss, or subordinate, and in this drama somebody is my pet, somebody, in this way I am having
so many relations, I may be having a beautiful dress upon me or ugly dress upon me, I may
behave intelligently, I may behave unintelligently, in this drama, temporary setup, I may attain
material success, I may not attain this temporary success in this drama, but this is a drama,
temporary setup.
So a person is not at all disturbed and does not waste his time in achieving something
in the drama which is temporary.
So he sells thirbuddhi, thirbuddhi means his intelligence is fixed because he knows self
is part and parcel of Krishna.
So because I am part and parcel of Krishna, always connected to Krishna, satisfying Krishna
will satisfy me.
Thus he is unbewarded by externally changing situations.
And how is it possible when a person can be situated on such platform who knows the science
of God is to be understood as already situated in transcendence.
Brahma janati, a person who knows what is Brahma.
So God, absolute truth is understood in three phases, Brahma, Paramatma and Bhagawan.
And these things are same, Brahma, Paramatma and Bhagawan, there is no difference.
In order to be undisturbed by illusion, we have to be fixed in reality.
What is reality?
After all the research of many lifetimes, those who are Tatvadarshina, Bhagavatam mentions
vadanti tattatmavidha, about that absolute truth they explain it is called Brahma, Paramatma
and Bhagawan.
What is, if it is same why different names are given?
So it is explained just like there is sun, sun God, sun globe and sunlight.
It is the same thing, the same sunlight, heat and light, it is the same substance,
but it is less dense.
The same heat and light would be very very intense on the sun globe and the light and
temperature of sun God's body would be much much higher than the sun globe also.
Sun globe is sustaining because of sun God, a person and because of the sun globe this
entire universe is illuminated with light.
So ultimately it is the same thing.
Heat and light is there but the density of heat and light, sun God's body is also made
up of heat and light but very very dense and intense heat and light.
And the sun globe is heat and light little less dense and the sunlight is even less dense
than that.
But ultimately it is heat and light only.
So in that sense there is no difference between sun God, sun globe and the sun rays.
Everything is ray only, everything is energy only.
In a similar fashion ultimately everything is Brahm, but when the density of Brahm is
very high, that density is present in the person Krishna.
And that is called Bhagawan feature, the personality of God.
And from that person expands Paramatma who is present in our heart and then entire energy
that we see or we don't see in this world is nothing but Brahm or transformation of
Brahm.
So some people understand when energy is present everywhere they are called Brahm realized
people and they realized I am actually that energy, I am not this body.
Then they realize God is present in my heart as Paramatma and then they realize actually
the source of Paramatma, two handed form of Krishna.
So a person should know the science of God, when he understands the science of God, who
is God and I am part and parcel of that God, then he is situated in transcendence.
Oh, but that would be very dull situation because a person is not rejoicing upon getting
something good.
He's not lamenting upon getting something bad.
Then the situation would be like stone.
He becomes like a stone, not at all disturbed and indifferent.
So when we tell some people a spiritual life means no disturbance at all, you are completely
liberated.
No, but what is the use of such life?
So agreed there is some misery, but there is some happiness also.
So no, that is not the understanding.
So here it is mentioned by his purseshwa sakta atma vindati atmani at sukham sabrahma yoga
yukta atma sukham akshayam ashrute such liberated person is not attracted to material sense
or external sense objects, but he is not like stone, but is always in trance.
How he is in trance?
Enjoying the pleasure within.
In this way, the self-realized person, brahma yoga yukta atma enjoys unlimited happiness
for he concentrates on the supreme brahma yoga yukta atma.
He is concentrated on the supreme and the sukham akshayam ashrute akshayam means unlimited
sukham means happiness ashrute means enjoys.
So liberated person does not take part in external happiness.
There is external happiness.
As I discussed gross platform mental happiness, we all enjoy in the form of some relationships
or in dreams like that.
And we also enjoy spiritual happiness that is within.
So a person, a devotee, a self-realized soul, he's always in trance.
He's always in a state of constant happiness, constant pleasure.
Why?
Because he's concentrating on the supreme.
So what is this pleasure of concentrating on the supreme?
It is a new kind of pleasure.
Just like when people become addicted to drugs, they curse the day when they started taking
drugs because they were not exposed to this, they were not hankering for it.
But once they were exposed to it, they got addicted to it.
When they got exposed to cigarette, they got addicted.
These are very different kinds of pleasures.
Similarly, there is another extraordinary kind of pleasure of meditating upon the supreme
Krishna within our heart.
What is that pleasure?
That Srila Prabhupada explains in the purport.
Sri Yamunacharya, a great devotee in Krishna consciousness, the spiritual master of great
preacher Sri Ramanujacharya, he says,
yadavadhi mamachetakrishnapadarvinde navnavarasaddhamanyudyatranthumasit
tadavadhi batanari sangame smarimane bhavati mukhvikara sujtunishti vanamcha
Since I have been engaged in the transcendental loving service of Krishna, realizing ever
new pleasure in Him, whenever I think of sex pleasure, I spit at the thought and my lips
curl with distaste.
A person in Brahma Yoga or Krishna consciousness is so absorbed in the loving service of the
Lord that he loses his taste for material sense pleasure altogether.
The highest pleasure in terms of matter is sex pleasure.
The whole world is moving under its spell and a materialist cannot work at all without
this motivation.
But a person engaged in Krishna consciousness can work with greater vigor without sex pleasure
which he avoids.
That is the test in spiritual realization.
Spiritual realization and sex pleasure go ill together.
A Krishna conscious person is not attracted to any kind of pleasure due to his being a
liberated soul.
So very very extraordinary verse it is.
Yadavadhi, Yamunacharya was a great king before and the kings enjoy all kinds of royal happiness
of sensual pleasures, wine and all etc.
So he is telling, but since the time I have become devotee, yadavadhi, yavadhi means time,
mamachetachetha means heart, krishnapadaravinde means lotus feet of Krishna.
Ever since I have been meditating upon the lotus feet of Krishna within my heart, navanavrasa
means pleasure, navanava means newer and newer pleasures.
Here in this life we need to keep on changing.
Sometimes I want to say this thing, then I want to have that thing.
People go on world tour because they want to see different things.
They want to see Dubai, then Rome, then Europe or some other countries.
They want to change their objects of vision.
But here Yamunacharya is telling I have been meditating upon same lotus feet but navanavrasa
newer and newer pleasures I am getting every day.
And sometimes when I think of women because he had so much enjoyment with women when he
was king.
So sometimes many devotees they express the difficulty that Prabhu I am having so many
disturbing thoughts and get attracted to opposite sex when I am studying, I am doing some work
and what to do, what is the solution.
So some people express, some people do not express, but this is the problem with everybody
without any exception in this material world.
So this is what has to be overcome.
This force is very very strong.
But here Yamunacharya is telling when I get such thoughts of my past life of such enjoyment
my mouth curls in distaste oh just like when you are passing on the street and you see
some stool on the roadside oh your mouth curls in distaste oh what is this dirty thing and
we spit on it.
So I spit on that thought oh my god what abominable thing has come to my mind what is this remembrance.
So just imagine what is this pleasure great pleasure.
So as Prabhupada explained as is the experience of everyone the whole world the impetus behind
why a person is working so hard taking so many responsibilities because of sex pleasure
sex life.
But here it is being explained.
This sex life and it is thought by Yamunacharya who was king who could have afforded unlimited
pleasure but the mouth is curling in distaste now so I spit on that thought.
So you can just imagine what would be extraordinary pleasure of spiritual life.
That is why the great kings who would have enjoyed unlimitedly they were going for this
pleasure.
This spiritual pleasure.
So this is the pleasure which the spiritual life offers the pleasure of concentrating
Brahma yoga yuktaatma concentrating on the lotus feet of Krishna.
So by this we can measure our spiritual advancement how much I am able to concentrate upon the
lotus feet of Krishna.
So for meditating upon the lotus feet yogis would have to undergo so much hardship they
have to give up all their wealth and property and renounce completely and they have to go
to sattvic place jungles or Himalayas follow yam niyam.
It begins with Brahmacharya as we have discussed before tapasabrahmacharayna shamenadamena
mind control sense control it is not easy.
So they have to do so much of pranayam and asanas to bring the senses under control.
The purpose of all the asanas and this thing is not to have good health or increase our
sexual potency.
So this is the purpose for which it is famous in the West and now in our country also but
it is to control the senses.
There is a science there is a force which is pushing the senses for sense objects by
doing pranayam asana it becomes they become controlled very very easily yoga indriya saiyamaha
and by that it is possible to meditate upon Krishna without disturbance.
A person will do dharana as he has read Krishna's description in the Vedas that Krishna is holding
this chakra gada in his hands similar form he is having earrings and such kind of helmet
such is the complexion standing on the lotus world so that thing they will imagine within
the heart dharana and then they will do dhyana and pratyahara pulling the senses inside stopping
all the external activities.
That is why there is ant hill upon the devotee the creepers grow upon the devotee and with
many many sages it happened it happened with chavan muni i think he was chavan muni only
happened with ranakashapu happened with valmiki so many people ants completely just imagine
the person would not have moved at all would not have gone for any activity of the body
would be sitting in that place.
So those people who want to follow ashtanga yoga on yoga mat you should be ready for this
stage that you are sitting in some jungle mountain and the ants have made ant hill upon
you can you sit like that then success is possible otherwise success is not possible
in yoga so maybe some very rare souls from previous yoga somewhere they are doing it
but for general mass of people it is not possible can we without eating without without drinking
without breathing also can we sit and just meditate if that stage is possible then we
can think of using yoga mat otherwise throw it away it is of no use yes maybe for keeping
some physical fitness you can do it sometimes otherwise such yoga will fetch no result and
the same yoga chaitanya maha prabhu has very very mercifully given to us simply chant
Hare Krishna maha mantra under the direction of spiritual master and the same result of
constant meditation absorption upon the lotus feet of krishna will be attained so not that
oh yes i have read i have to meditate on lotus feet let me sit and meditate now that again
will not be possible simply sitting and meditating so by chanting always constantly slowly krishna's
form would be revealed we would be able to meditate sorry with the chanting and then
when krishna's form is revealed then slowly krishna's pastimes are revealed then krishna's
qualities are revealed associates are revealed everything is revealed and the person is always
meditating upon the activities of krishna in the spiritual world within his heart
but prabhu so much we have heard about this pleasure and again we are hearing today how
to get this pleasure this question also devotees they ask i have been chanting 16 rounds trail i
am struggling so how where to how to get this spiritual pleasure spiritual bliss what is the
secret so it is a great science without the help of a of an expert person in this science
who is that the darshan a person cannot attain this spiritual pleasure that is why krishna tells
that with the pranipatina pari prasnena sevaya tatva darshana surrender to a tatva darshi he
will teach you he will explain you rigorous training is required just like so many books
are available in the market why a person takes admission in the school or college
in institution in organization so institution is very very important you can just imagine without
institution how many people would be able to attain education and of that level in that rigor
very very difficult so thus spiritual institution taking guidance participating is similarly very
very important without participating in the institution simply at home reading bhagavad
gita bhagavad gita says it will not be fruitful we have to take strict guidance and follow the
rules and regulations or spiritual institutions or spiritual masters
so it is explained very nicely in the bhagavatam when a person is able to experience this bliss
in spiritual life those who are new sometimes if the person is very sinful he will not feel
any pleasure at all other people may feel some pleasure sometimes but when the stage will come
when i am feeling constant pleasure in every spiritual activity so for that there is a
progression which is explained in the bhagavatam it begins with little inclination little interest
tata sadhu sanga second stage is then a person starts associating with the devotees
and when he's associating with the devotees
then bhajan kriya comes third step that is initiation a person takes initiation from
the spiritual master and engages in bhajan kriya loving service of krishna
kriya and after bhajan kriya comes fourth stage and that is anartha nivritti
anartha means unwanted activities so so many unwanted activities and the root cause of all
anarthas are four activities sthriya suna dhuti pana meat eating intoxication gambling and illicit
sex from here stem all the unwanted activities and all the distress in our life simply if
you can avoid these four activities a person can very smoothly advance in krishna consciousness
so these four activities and any unwanted unwanted happiness means any happiness which
is not for krishna that is unwanted we will see in the next class in the next shloka and we see
today also we we saw in that shloka birth and death they are connected similarly all happiness
is connected to some kind of distress here so it is anartha unwanted we are not required to have
this compromise of happiness and distress together we are meant to enjoy unalloyed happiness so anartha
all such kind of material happiness a person gets rid of unwanted addictions and when the heart is
cleansed from all the anarthas the greed and lust is gone from the heart then comes nistha
when all the sins are destroyed nistha means firm faith so unless a person is indulging in sinful
activities he is not doing bhajan kriya nicely not taking initiation following rules and regulations
it is not possible to have uh this stage of firm faith which is called nistha and this firm faith
firm faith in krishna and spiritual master both and when this nistha is attained then
this nistha this faith transforms just like the milk is transformed into curd in a similar fashion
the same nistha strong faith is transformed into ruchi it is transformed into taste so then a person
starts getting constant taste chanting a person would be looking forward for chanting it would
not be a burden who i have committed so i have to finish my around 16 rounds or whatever person
would be looking forward to chanting person would look forward to kirtan for uh associating with
their devotees for hearing for doing services maybe some menial services person would be very
very eager to engage in service of krishna everything would give so much pleasure that is
called ruchi and after ruchi comes asakti asakti means strong attachment kind of addiction just
like people get addicted if they don't drink tea in the morning so their head starts paining
they feel restless in a similar fashion a person becomes restless without spiritual practices that
is called asakti becomes so much attached to it and then after asakti comes bhava bhava means then
he starts feeling spiritual emotions for krishna and after bhava comes prema prema means love of
god so that is a perfection of spiritual life which we have to attain and then this prema keeps
on intensifying keeps on increasing forever there is no limit to it so we have to attain this stage
of prema that is a purpose of human form of life that is what the spiritual life offers to us
so many of us would have realized that what is this prema this pleasure when a person
gets attracted to somebody starts loving somebody so the heart becomes full of pleasure
so we want to have this feeling but somehow we do not know where to apply it
if you put your love instead of upon dog you put your love upon a snake what will happen the snake
one day will eat you or will bite you but if you put your love or faith upon dog then there
would be proper reciprocation in a similar fashion we have to understand if you put your love upon
any of the living entity here it is not possible for the living entities to reciprocate but the
same you want to love somebody there is another person he is a real person god if you put your
loving propensity upon him then your heart then he is able to reciprocate perfectly because we
are connected to him so these are the stages of spiritual advancement so we all want ruchi in
life we are waiting when bliss will come in spiritual life i will experience so yes bliss
will come when we cross the stage of nishtha ruchi then we will start experiencing spiritual bliss
and for that what we have to follow we have to follow bhajan kriya very very strictly
anarthi nivritti has to happen as long as i'm breaking the regulative principles
or i'm not fixed up in bhajan kriya bhajan kriya means spiritual master after initiation
he gives some positive rules and regulations you have to get up at this time you have to eat this
thing you don't have to just like institution has got rules and regulations spiritual master
spiritual master once you take admission into the institution he gives you some rules and
regulations to follow just like you agree to follow whatever the school authorities tell
me i will agree in a similar fashion disciple surrenders to guru and he agrees to follow
the instructions so either you are not doing bhajan kriya properly or you are not situated on
anarthi nivritti then it is not possible to attain the stage of firm faith nishtha our faith would
always be shaky sometimes i will think oh krishna is good it is so nice you will get some pleasure
let me follow other times doubt will keep on coming and spiritual life there is no destiny
at all depends upon you if you are sincere you will keep on advancing advancing the more eager
you are the faster you will advance and it is not that you after some time you will make your
spiritual life perfect everything is left to us but in human form of life we have sense in human
form of life if we get into wrong association somehow lose the devotee association or we leave
this body then finished we do not know how many millions of years or lives we have to wait to get
next suitable human form so that is why it is told to namya tetanapatet anumrityu yavan to nam to nam
means with great haste just like a prisoner is there he sees oh the guard is sleeping the lockup
is open let me run out now this is the only time otherwise the guard is going to wake up he will
lock me and some prisoners they run out actually so this situation is very very rare that the guard
is also sleeping and the door is unlocked so that is a form that we have got in this year that is
a chance which we have got in human form of life now we can run off run out from this burden death
and before the guard wake up before i leave this human body i can leave any time
i should be very very eager to finish my spiritual life it all depends upon eagerness
so when i follow the rules and regulations of spiritual master very very sincerely
and i'm free of an arthaas then comes strong faith firm faith and then comes ruchi taste in spiritual life
so we have to follow rules and regulations very nicely otherwise it is not possible
very very strictly we have to follow if i am compromising in my life i am little loose in
life i am little loose in following then we can forget forget we can forget an undisciplined
person can never experience spiritual pleasure in life or material happiness also so we should be
very very eager just like we are eager in school when will i go to next class when will i go to
next class when will i go to college when will i sit for job i'll get job because i'm waiting
when will i get money money money job so very eagerly they are willing to cross the classes
sometimes they skip the classes in a similar fashion we should be advanced please teach me
i will implement it please give me next next instruction i will implement it in this way
i should be eager to take instructions from spiritual master so this is a gradual sequence
however there is one shortcut also what is a shortcut so that she left about rights all of
you please read the purports because we have to cover many chapters we cover some portions of
the purport otherwise even one word of the purport should not be missed so prabhupada mentions
usually we have to follow this sequential process to come to the level of
ruchi or taste in spiritual life but
a person can attain this consciousness if the spiritual master is merciful one can
attain this consciousness even without following the regulative principles or if the spiritual
master is merciful upon any disciple following of the regulative principles becomes very very easy
so ultimately that is why shreemad bhagavatam says
how does it come
so means pure devotees there are some pure devotees who are so pure we go to dham we go to
teerth so that we can get rid of our sinful activities and the dham gets burdened with those
sinful with those sins and these pure devotees they don't go to dham they don't take dip in
rivers to purify the rivers that is why mother ganja she's praying to krishna let krishna you
were here on this planet so all the people they come and wash off their sins upon in me in my
waters and i am carrying those sins but by your touch i was getting purified now you are leaving
this planet how will i get purified i will suffer from the sins of these people
so then it is told lord krishnatas don't worry after so many years my devotees will come
and they will sing and chant my holy names and they will purify you from all the sins
so that is why the pure devotees of krishna they are so powerful they purify the places of pilgrimage
they are that is the potency of pure devotee by engaging in the service of such pure devotee
syat means becomes possible this taste becomes possible so that is why although the westerners
they were having so many addictions and they would struggle somehow with those things but still they
were enjoying spiritual bliss you can see in that picture which we have attached for today's creative
how much blissful they are that is all they were able to follow and take so much hardship
so this is possible there is a shortcut if a person can please the spiritual master somehow
or the other by very very sincere service so then if a person is struggling with
regulatory principles following that will become easy or without following also yes from our side
we should be very very eager to follow the regulatory principles but a spiritual master
is merciful somebody can make advancement even without following it or following will become very
very easy so please always keep this in mind even by gradual process also without pleasing
spiritual master it is not possible unless we surrender to spiritual master take initiation
follow his guidance ecstasy bliss in spiritual life routine spiritual life would be simply
imagination and a person who understands what factor is making possible my gradual progression
through these nine stages that is actually mercy of spiritual master so let me serve and engage in
his service very very nicely and get his causeless mercy so this is the secret of spiritual advancement
that is the pleasure of the spiritual master so we should try to understand what is the desire
of the spiritual master and engage in his service very very nicely if he's pleased immediately that
there are some devotees who are very new in krishna consciousness maybe they would have spent just a
couple of weeks and they tell sometimes they call prabhu i'm getting so much pleasure in chanting
i don't want to stop i just want to continue i have chanted 20 rounds now 30 rounds today i
want to continue and they tell like that because somehow they have pleased the spiritual master
so please always keep this secret in mind mercy of spiritual master either in gradual process
or direct process is the key and if directly we can engage understand the desires of spiritual
master then very quickly we attain to the platform of spiritual bliss and what is the platform of
spiritual bliss even the greatest pleasure of this material world my mouth will come in
curl and distaste that is krishna consciousness and that is very easily available for all of us
so last time somebody told me to summarize the session
so it is nice if you can take down some notes also we also take down notes when we hear the
lectures of senior devotees of prabhupada and then we should not forget after hearing the lecture
we should contemplate upon it whatever i have read that is called third stage
entire day we should be contemplating upon this philosophy upon the form of krishna chanting the
holy name always we have to keep in touch with krishna we should not forget after reading
so still to summarize to summarize first thing we saw that the self-realized souls are situated
on the platform of equanimity and they are not happy by getting something pleasant they are not
disturbed by getting something unpleasant why because they know the science of god and they
are always rejoicing upon the pleasure within their heart what is the pleasure which they rejoice
within their heart lord krishna explains here the explanation is there so the form of krishna within
the heart that is so pleasant to concentrate upon that they enjoy such a great pleasure in
front of which material pleasure becomes unworthy so now we will try to do this chanting and
when we do any process one important thing i could not tell the entire spiritual life is a
very very personal process so chanting can be done either for
my peace of mind or i become happy or it can be done as a service to krishna so it is told
that a person who is chanting with the pure intention of pleasing the krishna as service
to krishna that person is very very glorious he will very soon attain spiritual perfection
so when we are chanting i should do chanting for the primary and direct pleasure of krishna
so when i chant krishna's name krishna becomes pleased and spiritual master also becomes pleased
somebody asked pravupada pravupada how can i please you pravupada would tell distribute books
preach and other times he told when you chant krishna's name that pleases me so for the pleasure
of guru and krishna i should do chanting when i am sitting for chanting with my chanting bag
i should get great pleasure now krishna will be happy and now pravupada will be happy my
spiritual master would be happy and with this mood for pleasing krishna and pravupada i should chant
and hoping that someday they will give me association i should simply please them without
committing offenses all offenses stem from inattentiveness i should not be inattentive
here each and every word very very carefully in this way i am trying to please them i may get
spiritual pleasure i may not this get spiritual pleasure does not matter i should give spiritual
pleasure to them when i am going to sit down honoring krishna prasadam oh today's nice gulab jamun
prasadam i will enjoy no this prasadam when i honor then krishna would get pleased pravupada
would get pleased with this mood i am honoring prasadam so when i am engaging in service so all
the seva all the sadhana should be done for direct pleasure of krishna and spiritual master
that yields quick results
