karmanya karmayah pashet akarmani cakarmayaha sabuddhiman manusheshu sayukta kritsna karmakrit
karmani akarmayah pashet one who sees inaction in action and action in inaction is intelligent among men
and he is in transcendental position although engaged in all sorts of activities.
So it is very very difficult to understand who is a transcendental person
and sometimes even very advanced devotees also get bewildered.
One such instance is of Gadadhar Pandit Prabhu.
Who is Gadadhar Pandit? We chant the Panchatatva Mantra.
Sri Krishna Chaitanya, Prabhu Nityananda, Sri Advaita, Gadadhar, Sri Vasadi, Gaurav Bhaktavrinda.
These are the Panchatatvas, Krishna and his five different manifestations.
So Gadadhar Pandit, who is one of the associates of Lord Chaitanya,
who appeared 500 years ago, to spread this most confidential knowledge.
So as we have discussed, spiritual life is the prime motto of everything that is followed
by the followers of Varnashrama Dharma or Sanatana Dharma.
Whatever activities they may do, celebrations may do, the food they cook, they eat,
the way they walk, they talk, even the way they play, the children's play, snakes and ladders,
that is also designed so that children can also learn about the goal of life
and understand about this wonderful philosophy in a playful way.
So it is called Moksha Patti, the path of liberation, if I remember correctly.
It is called Vaikuntha Palli. Vaikuntha means the spiritual world.
So the child knows ultimately I have to go to Vaikuntha.
So the snakes and ladders is the other modern terminology that we have.
Otherwise it is called Vaikuntha Palli, Moksha Patti.
So the child is aware, I have to get liberation, I have to go to Vaikuntha, that is the aim of life.
So all the snakes, they represent devices, lust, greed and anger.
Lust is very dangerous. I have advanced so much in spiritual life, I can fall down.
Anger, even after lust, you have to control that.
Otherwise you will come down to lower planets and near the tail of the snake would be one planet
or some hellish planets. You did robbery, then you go to this punishment.
And then there are some virtues like truthfulness, honesty, simplicity, tolerance and all these things.
Those are ladders, you can rise up, you can go to higher level, you do charity, you go to this planet,
better life standard, you do this thing, you go to this place.
So in this way, the entire philosophy is presented very nicely.
However, spiritual advancement has been the aim of life.
But to understand who is spiritually advanced and not, it's very, very difficult.
So once it so happened that Lord Chattanyahu came here to give the highest benediction to humanity,
the summit of spiritual advancement, although in every way left and right by alluring people,
by making people fearful of the descriptions of hell, which is not fantasy but reality.
But by any means, the people are encouraged to become advanced on the spiritual path.
But Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did not appear, as we understood in the last session,
for introducing ordinary spirituality.
Lord Chattanya gave,
Anarpit, arpit means to offer.
Anarpit Charim Chirath, Chirath means for a very, very long time.
This was not offered by Krishna, which was not offered.
There are various rasas that we get here.
If the world is completely full of misery, obviously people would find out where to go, what to find.
It is very hellish here.
But there is some pleasure somehow, even though there is great suffering.
In midst of all that great suffering, there is little rasa.
Rasa means taste.
So Bhagavata mentions, although in the life of a householder, there are so many troubles.
He thinks, why did I enter the household life?
But when he hears the broken voice of his children, he feels very nice.
When he sees the smile of the family member, sometimes he feels very nice.
Sometimes here and there, there is some pleasure.
That is called rasa.
Different rasas a person enjoys.
But there is a difference in rasas.
The intimacy, the pleasure, which a person may enjoy with his other relatives, cousins,
may not be with his close family members.
That rasa is different.
The rasa which a person can enjoy with his brother or sister may still not be as enjoyable, as intimate,
as a person may enjoy with his or her spouse.
So there is difference in the rasas.
Although a person wants to enjoy all rasas, still there is a difference.
So there is one rasa which is topmost.
And what is that rasa, topmost rasa, topmost pleasure, enjoyment?
That is his own bhakti.
So the highest pleasure that a person can derive
is the pleasure derived from engaging oneself in the service of Krishna.
And this is extremely difficult to attain.
As we will see in Bhagavad Gita, Krishna tells,
bahu naam janma naam ante, after many many births,
a person is able to understand the knowledge of Krishna.
And which kind of person, gyanavan, who is gyanee,
to become gyanavan, it takes millions of births.
So many species you have to cross, then you come to human form.
And in human form also you have to very very systematically
try to satisfy your desires, following the Vedas.
Then if you follow the Vedas and you try to satisfy the desires,
you will be saved from the sinful activities, punishment.
And you have satisfied yourself, you realize satisfaction is not there,
even though senses were satisfied,
then slowly a person comes to the level of jnana.
And then Krishna, after many births, he will understand, very difficult.
And after understanding, he may develop love and affection for Krishna.
So this highest thing is very very rare to be experienced in the universe.
Knowledge about God is very rare, what to speak of love of God.
And Lord Chaitanya has come in Kali Yuga to give this highest pleasure,
love of God, to everyone.
Rasam sabhakti shriyam.
So when Lord Chaitanya came to give this highest spirituality,
the highest pleasure which was not offered by Krishna.
So spiritual life, spiritual knowledge, it cannot be grabbed by our endeavour.
Okay, let me finish the entire thing.
Let me meditate and chant this entire day.
And I will realize it is not possible unless it is offered by Krishna.
So it is written in Bhagavad Gita.
Unless the spiritual master sees the disciple is very gentle, submissive and obedient,
spiritual master is not willing to reveal the secrets of spiritual life.
So the disciple has to be very very gentle, obedient,
and then the revelation will happen when the personalities are pleased.
Spiritual master and Krishna.
So when Lord Chaitanya came here, his associates also came.
So Srimati Radharani incarnated as Gadadhar Pandit.
Because Chaitanya Mahaprabhu had to play the part of sannyasi,
now sannyasi cannot associate with women.
So that is why this transcendental arrangement was there.
So anyway, so Gadadhar Pandit was present who is incarnation of Radharani.
Now Gadadhar Pandit, when he was once told that there is a very nice sannyasi who has come here,
nice devotee, not sannyasi, nice devotee has come here.
So let us go and meet that devotee.
So another devotee told him Mukund Prabhu.
So he told very nice, let us go and see, we should meet the devotees.
And when he went there, the devotee's name was Pundarik Vidyanidhi.
Who is Pundarik Vidyanidhi?
In Chaitanya Leela, he is Vrishabhanu Maharaj, in Krishna Leela.
Vrishabhanu Maharaj is father of Shrimati Radharani.
So when Shrimati Radharani incarnates as Gadadhar Pandit in Lord Chaitanya's past time,
Vrishabhanu Maharaj incarnates as Pundarik Vidyanidhi.
And Pundarik Vidyanidhi, when they went to see him, he apparently behaved like a materialist.
And he was doing some activities which might be considered objectionable,
especially by those who follow spiritual life.
So Gadadhar Pandit thought in his mind, what is this person?
So he's telling that he's very advanced spiritualist,
but he appears to be a gross materialist enjoying his senses.
And then Mukund Prabhu understood, this is what is happening, offenses are happening in the mind.
So a devotee should be so careful, not physically, not verbally,
even in mind offense should not happen towards devotees, especially advanced devotees.
So he understood some offenses happening.
So although Pundarik Vidyanidhi was a liberated person, he was acting like a gross materialist.
So it is mentioned in Sri Chaitanya Charitamrita, Shrimad Bhagavatam.
And we see also in the life of the devotees, that the devotees in this material world, all this is going on.
Now everyone wants to become center of attraction.
Everyone is shooting their own photos and videos.
And in one sense, we all want to become Krishna, Krishna means all attractive.
We want to take the position of Krishna, all attractive, all should be attracted towards me.
So Krishna fulfills the desire of living entity.
You want to become actor, actress? Okay.
Make your own movies, you float your own videos and become center of attraction.
And the devotee's life is otherwise, he wants to move away from center of attraction
because he knows if the Jeeva gets attracted towards me, what benefit he will have.
I myself am dissatisfied in my life.
If I attract somebody, what satisfaction will that be for anybody?
So that is why he understands unless somebody is attracted towards Krishna, his life would be or her life would be empty.
So that is why devotee never wants to become center of attraction.
Rather, he behaves like an ordinary person's madman and sometimes materialist.
The Paramhansa who met Prahlad Maharaj or Dhruv Maharaj, he was behaving like a madman.
Without any clothes, he was roaming, he was just lying down in the jungle.
And Jodh Bharat, Bharat Maharaj, when he took another birth, he was also behaving like a madman.
So sometimes they behave like madmen.
And some other people like Madhavendra Puri, the great devotee who discovered Gopal Ji deity, Srinath Ji deity.
As soon as he got to know that Gopinath Ji has stolen a sweet rice pot for me and I am going to become very famous, overnight he left the place.
We are working very, very hard to become famous and the devotee never wants to become famous.
So in Chaitanya Charita Amrit, that is mentioned, we don't have information about some Goswamis because they spoke on this condition.
You will not mention our name anywhere. You will not describe about us anywhere.
Although those Goswamis are the founders of Vrindavan, modern Vrindavan, but they don't want to have any credit.
They don't want to have any name. So it is very, very difficult to figure out who is a transcendentalist or liberated person.
But the devotees also know how to figure out advanced devotees.
So Mukun Prabhu understood that this offense is happening in Gadadhar's mind.
So let me do something and immediately started reciting the Shloka of Bhagavatam.
Now we are so much there in the bodily concept of life, just like a sick man cannot taste, cannot enjoy food.
But a healthy man enjoys nice foodstuffs.
Similarly, a person who is liberated, who understands what is his real position.
I am not the body. I am eternally servant of God. I am connected to him. He is my eternal relative.
So he feels immediate, unlimited pleasure by hearing any Shloka spoken by or connected to Krishna.
So when the Shloka of Bhagavatam was recited, he came so much in ecstasy,
that he could not control himself. His body started shivering and he started rolling on the floor.
These are called ashtasatvik vikaras. So it is not theory.
There are standard symptoms of love of God. Just like if you get COVID, there are standard symptoms,
which you will display any disease you have, tuberculosis, you have jaundice, malaria.
Standard symptoms are there. In a similar fashion, there are standards,
technical symptoms, which are very beautifully described. So spiritual life is not some vague thing,
very exactly technically it is described. So there are various symptoms, manifestations,
which occur in the body when a person is situated in love of God.
So shivering of body and all these symptoms. So he could not control himself,
although he wanted to feel like a materialist as he was doing for the general people.
But when this Bhagavatam Shloka was recited, he could not control himself.
He went mad in love of God and he started rolling, shivering.
And then Gadadhar Pandit realized, oh my God, he is such an advanced devotee, he is a paramhansa.
And if you have committed such an offense, if you have thought wrongly against a pure devotee,
so there is only one solution. The greatest mistake that a person can commit in his life is Vaishnava Prada,
offending a devotee. Somehow or other, knowingly or unknowingly, if a Vaishnava is hurt,
Vaishnava will not take any hurt, will not feel bad, but Krishna notices.
So when the Duryodhana party, why Duryodhana and others were killed, they were very able managers,
they were very, very charitable. Management was perfect, but they were non-devotees
and they offended the devotees. This was the main reason, because they offended Pandavas
time and again, Krishna decided, this is not done, they have to be killed.
So Pandavas did not take offense, they told, they are my brothers only, we don't want to hurt.
And Dhritarashtra was taken very nice care, even though all the sons were killed,
even though Dhritarashtra wanted to kill and he was the main person behind the plot,
but he was taken care like their own father and mother.
So Pandavas did not take an offense, Draupadi did not take, Arjuna did not take,
they wanted to forgive, but Krishna told, no, if anybody offends my devotees, I will not forgive.
So even though our karma could be good, we might have a long life and prosperous life.
If you offend devotees of Krishna, advanced spiritualists, immediately all suffering comes in our life.
So that is why we should be very, very careful. I'll narrate some historical incidents also from Bhagavatam about Vaishnava Pradha.
So there's a greatest danger of spiritual life. Now if a person commits Vaishnava Pradha, how we can come out of it?
So the solution is only to engage in service of that Vaishnava, fall at the feet of the Vaishnava and please him by sincere service.
So Gadadhar Pandit thought now that my only hope of recovery in spiritual life is if I serve this great personality for the rest of my life.
And what better way to serve is to accept that personality as spiritual master.
So then Gadadhar Pandit accepted Pundarik Vidyanidhi as a spiritual master.
And the relationship between spiritual master and disciple is that of father and son.
Spiritual master is considered father. So Pundarik Vidyanidhi became like father of Gadadhar Pandit and he is always father of Shrimati Radharani.
So the same mood relationship was maintained in this Leela also.
So the summary of this pastime is it is very difficult to figure out who is an advanced spiritualist transcendental person.
So here Krishna is giving. How does a person act? How does a person think?
As far as his perspective is concerned, that is explained in this shloka. He sees inaction in action.
The materialist could be very, very active, doing his job nicely, his business nicely, his studies nicely or even philanthropy nicely.
But all such actions, when a person can understand there is no stuff in all these activities, it is complete inaction.
That is a transcendental position that Krishna is telling.
If a person gives any credit to activities for satisfaction of one's own senses or senses of other person, then he is not sufficiently advanced.
When a person understands if a person is working with the objective just to satisfy the senses, he could be doing either activities, either of the activities which we discussed, that is inaction.
And some people accuse the materialists, the spiritualists of doing inactivity.
And we had one very nice devotee and he recently started following us.
Earlier he was associated with some social, political, religious group.
And when he started following Krishna Consciousness sincerely, all those people, because he was an important role in that organization also.
So they started accusing him. They used the word Akarmi. You have become Akarmi. Akarmi means person who is inactive.
He thinks chanting Hare Krishna and this thing is wasting time.
You do something, you help people, supply food, do XYZ and so many other stuffs which they expect.
So materialists may consider spiritual activities to be inactivity, just like those who have recently picked up Krishna Consciousness.
So you may hear from your friends or even family members.
Little is okay. So much you are chanting. You are chanting 10 rounds, you are chanting 16 rounds. This is too much.
Two hours you are wasting on chanting. Do some good thing in that time.
They say it is inactivity. There is no use of such action.
But a transcendent sees action in inaction.
Although apparently devotee is not doing anything, may not be doing anything externally.
But he is doing real activity. We are spirit souls. Spiritual advancement is real advancement.
And this material platform is temporary platform, just like we enter into some drama.
In drama, you may become very rich. What is the use of that richness?
Similarly, we have taken this dress. This dress may become famous, may have some muscles or beauty
and may have some extraordinary skills and talents and wealth, but it's all like a sandcastle.
And one wave comes and the castle dissolves.
So everything is gone away and the soul continues to suffer. So this is inactivity, no substantial activity.
So this is the perspective of a spiritualist who is in transcendental position, not in material position.
So now the question is, how does he act? Because he's seen in action in action.
So does it mean he will not do any activity because he sees all the activities that people are doing here?
It does not make any sense. So will he simply keep on sitting in one place or lying down in one place entire day?
So what is the mode of action of our transcendent list?
So let us see that today, what Krishna is explaining. Very beautiful shlokas.
So Lord Krishna tells,
So Krishna tells,
One who is understood to be in full knowledge, one is understood to be in full knowledge.
So we all want knowledge, but a person who has full knowledge, just imagine, there is so much of knowledge available.
We cannot even think of being expert in one field of knowledge.
But here Krishna is talking about a person who has full knowledge.
How does he act? How does he behave?
One is understood to be in full knowledge, whose every act is devoid of desire for sense gratification.
He is said by sages to be a worker whose fruitive action is burned up by the fire of perfect knowledge.
So the first symptom which is mentioned of a person in full knowledge is every act, we may do various activities in 24 hours, day after day.
We eat, we drink, we walk, we talk, we sit, we jump, we run, we watch, we hear, we taste, we smell, we do all kinds of things, we touch.
So every act without exception is devoid of desire for sense gratification.
Now when we do all these activities, what is my purpose?
I get up in the morning. Why do I get up in the morning?
So that I can work for my enjoyment.
So such kind of getting up this activity is not the activity of a man of full knowledge.
Then you keep your body fit so that you can enjoy.
This is also sense gratification, my personal enjoyment.
Then I may do some work out, I may go for jogging or I may have some breakfast.
Again, or I may check some phone, my mails or my task list.
Why? Because it is my enjoyment, sense gratification.
So again, this is not the symptom of full knowledge.
Then a person may relax, may sit down, may take rest again so that I can get happiness, I can get relief.
It is again desire for sense gratification.
So when a man is in perfect knowledge, every act is devoid of desire for sense gratification.
So it is not that he is not acting, he is acting.
But the action is devoid of desire for sense enjoyment.
We have to understand enjoyment of senses.
Why then? He does not work for sense gratification.
Then what is the use of work? He should sleep or sit down or he should die.
Why is working living here?
So we have to understand senses are not all in all.
Our five senses have some kind of gratification enjoyment.
Higher than the enjoyment of five senses is the enjoyment of mind as we have discussed before.
Mental gratification, mind is sixth sense.
But we are completely different that Lord Krishna has explained before itself.
The real gratification, happiness is my gratification, my satisfaction of spirit soul which is beyond the satisfaction of senses.
So when a person simply thinks satisfying the senses in my aim of life, he misses satisfying his spirit soul. Why?
Because spirit soul is part and parcel of Krishna.
So when he works not for the satisfaction of his senses independently but works for the satisfaction of senses of Krishna, then he himself gets satisfied.
Now in that process, senses may find satisfaction, senses may not find satisfaction.
Sometimes we are tired and I have to get up in the morning for attaining to my Mangala Aarti which my spiritual master has ordered me to attend every day.
My body, my senses are feeling pain but still Krishna is feeling pleasure, spiritual master is pleased in such activity.
I don't feel like chanting today, my mind is going here and there and this chanting is extra disturbance.
I am not able to read, I am very tired.
But devotee stands, walks, washes his face, somehow completes his vow.
With great determination he follows. Why?
Although my senses are being troubled, I have not slept properly.
But still I will finish my vows because spiritual master and Krishna would be satisfied.
So every act is for the satisfaction of Krishna, not for his own senses.
Sometimes senses can be satisfied also.
He is doing, listening nice Sankirtan, wonderful music is coming, falling on the ears.
He wants to sing also. He wants to dance also.
So in this sense, senses are also satisfied.
Sometimes he has to fast for the pleasure of Krishna.
Senses are dissatisfied completely but Krishna is satisfied so he will fast.
And sometimes he would feast also.
There is nice day, Nandotsava, the next day of Krishna's appearance day.
So he takes nice prasadam which is offered to Krishna.
So senses are satisfied and the soul is also satisfied.
So primary aim is satisfaction of Krishna's senses because he understands,
he has full knowledge that I am part and parcel of Krishna.
So only satisfaction of Krishna will satisfy me.
So I should not think about satisfaction of senses.
In the process of satisfying Krishna, senses may find satisfaction, that is good.
Senses may find dissatisfaction, that is also good because ultimately I will be satisfied.
So this concept is very important to understand.
Do not think becoming rich will make you happy or remaining poor will make you happy. No.
Richness in the process of serving Krishna or taking poverty in the process of serving Krishna will satisfy us.
The primary thing is satisfaction of Krishna.
Sometimes for the service of Krishna we have to live in big temples for preaching.
The Prabhupada told forest temples are not required.
Prabhupada when you visit, you see how Prabhupada was staying.
He purchased big big mansions and it is told there was a fisher mansion.
It is still there in Detroit, our temple.
And that temple was so huge that time when devotees saw that you know just like we park some motorbikes or cars in our lot, in our house.
There was a space not just to park cars and other things but to park boats also.
There were two ways. One side the house opens towards the some lake is there.
So you can park boats and you can go out in the boat in the town.
Or you can come out on the roadside. Such a wonderful place.
It was a huge thing and it was very very expensive.
Then two very rich some devotees somehow they contributed.
It happened and Prabhupada just stayed there for one day.
He never returned back to that temple again.
So if we get such a place you would like to spend some time at least every year or we always if not we are staying there.
But Prabhupada never returned back to that temple again.
In Vrindavan Prabhupada was living if you have seen if you have not seen we will take you to Radha Damodar temple.
Very old dilapidated temple it was that time.
And in two small rooms Prabhupada was living nicely over there.
Goswamis were living under tree but Prabhupada told if we continue living like this for us grass hut is best to live.
Devotees very satisfied in that.
But if we live in this grass hut who will come here to hear about Krishna.
So in order to bring people we need to have a nice temple so that people can come and visit and then we can talk about Krishna.
We can explain it to them.
So thus if Krishna desires devotee is willing to live in jungle devotees live in Vrindavan other places jungle.
If Krishna wishes devotee can live in city like New York Times Square to preach Krishna consciousness.
So this should be the principle.
This is called knowledge.
Every act is devoid of desire for sense gratification.
And unfortunately for most of us we have been trained to work for satisfaction of senses five organs and mind.
So this is not knowledge.
This is lack of knowledge.
How much ever a person can have degrees and he would have read columns and newspapers and he has blogs and we logs and everything.
He is not considered knowledgeable if he acts for enjoyment of senses.
Next.
That's why karma phala Sangham Nithya tripto nirashrayaha.
Karma abhi pravrittopi naiva kanchit karoti sahaa.
That's why karma phala Sangham abandoning all attachment to the results of his activities.
Ever satisfied Nithya tripta nirashrayaha and independent.
He performs no fruitive action although engaged in all kinds of undertakings.
So devotee is not sleeping sitting at one place.
Devotee may be engaged may not be or may be against satisfaction of Krishna is concerned.
If Krishna orders you sit here and chant 24 hours you preach in that you satisfy me in that way.
Devotee will sit there is simply chanting entire day.
You sit here and just think about me.
Devotee will think about Krishna continuously Samadhi or you shoot arrows for me.
Arjuna was told like that.
He shot arrows for Krishna.
You shoot arrows upon me.
Bhishma was given the service.
So Bhishma is also pure devotee of Krishna.
But he fought on the wrong side because Krishna wanted to have pleasure of fighting.
So you told Bhishma you shoot arrows upon me.
Those arrows should strike me.
The saver was given to Bhishma.
So thus a devotee can shoot arrows can take arrows can sit nicely or can be very very active although but he is engaged in all kinds of undertakings.
He has no attachment to the results of his activities.
Why we work we want the result of our activities.
So people tell no no I like my job we should find a job which you like.
Sir we don't like any job.
If you stop getting salary and still we want to continue in that job it means we like to do the job.
Is there any person who is willing to work very nicely.
Boss tells I will not give you salary.
So many people claim to follow Bhagavad Gita.
Just tell them boss OK you are following Bhagavad Gita.
I will not give you salary.
So then we will understand whether we like our job or not.
So the result could be money which is predominant result of our activities.
The result could be name fame also and the result could be some satisfaction of our intellect also.
Some people are simply doing research or they are simply studying.
So that also gives intellectual satisfaction.
Suppose in your research work you may claim I am not getting money.
I like doing research but if you do not find the answer you do not come to conclusion not able to solve confusions.
The scientists they start drinking heavily and they also commit suicide when they are not able to understand how is it happening.
It happened with the unknown father of modern computers who was directly given admission into MIT even before finishing school.
So the result could be intellectual satisfaction or monetary satisfaction or name fame but we are attached to the results of the activities.
So a devotee a spiritualist who is having perfect knowledge Lord Krishna God is telling
he has no attachment to the results of his activities and he is ever satisfied.
What is our state?
We are never satisfied.
This is our education system.
It teaches us never remain satisfied in your life.
But Krishna is telling a man in full knowledge is Nitya Tripta.
Nitya means eternal always.
He is satisfied.
In every situation he is satisfied just imagine.
So this is called knowledge.
If your knowledge is keeping you ever dissatisfied what is the use in hope of some future enjoyment.
No now I enjoy at this time and always.
So that is the work of a devotee.
So some people tell that you are praying praying entire day and if you do not get the result then what will you continue to pray.
They don't understand.
Prayer itself is success for a devotee.
Devotee does not offer prayer to Krishna to ask something devotee glorifies activities of Krishna.
Kunti Maharani she is offering prayers.
Shukadeva Goswami is offering prayers.
Akrura is offering prayers.
Dhruva Maharaj is offering prayers.
Their prayers are not Krishna please give us something.
Ishwara Paramakrishna, Satchidananda Vigraha, Anadiradhir Govinda, Sarvakaaran Kaaranam, Brahma is offering prayer.
Ishwara Paramakrishna we are all controllers but supreme controller over whom there is no controller
that is Krishna.
Satchitananda Vigraha his form is not made of blood and bones and pus and mucus.
His form is made of Satchitananda different energies.
Vigraha he has got a form.
Anadhir he has no beginning.
Adhir he is the beginning of everyone.
Govinda, Govinda means he gives pleasure to the senses.
Sarvakaaran Kaaranam every effect has a cause.
But if you keep on tracing like this the point the ultimate cause that is Govinda Madhipurusham.
Tamahambajami I worship dad Govinda.
So like this they are glorifying the position of Krishna and simply by this glorification offering prayers
devotee finds unlimited satisfaction.
He is not asking for some just like he is not having any business dealing with Krishna.
Simply for devotee is allowed to offer prayers to Krishna that itself is success to Krishna.
When we are chanting Hare Krishna mantra our prayer is Krishna just keep me engaged in your chanting.
When we are cleaning the floor of Krishna, Krishna please engage in your service always.
Because a devotee finds so much satisfaction of course by some little advancement we can experience this thing.
Initially even though mind and body does not agree we follow this.
This is called training sadhana.
So when a devotee he is engaged in seva he is not looking for any result from seva.
He just likes the seva.
Actually a devotee only can like his job and nobody else.
So that is why devotee is not at all attached to results.
Krishna has told me to work in this way.
The result comes I offer to Krishna.
The result doesn't come I don't offer to Krishna.
And so he is ever satisfied because devotee finds job satisfaction.
No other person finds job satisfaction.
Because this job is directly connected to Krishna and devotee is always part and parcel of Krishna.
So simply by engaging in service of Krishna devotee is ever satisfied.
He doesn't have to wait for the fruit.
And because devotees always satisfied he is independent.
If you are dissatisfied then you have to engage in somebody's service.
You cannot be independent.
You have to remain dependent upon your employer or you have to remain dependent upon your subordinates.
You have to remain dependent upon some other animals or people or XYZ.
But devotee is independent because he is satisfied.
He does not need anything else.
Krishna arranges everything for him.
Some maintenance is required so he is independent.
He performs no fruitive action.
Fruitive action means activities which are meant to produce fruits for one's enjoyment.
So this is his actions are not fruitive actions.
Although he is engaged in all kinds of undertakings.
So just see this is the way man in perfect knowledge acts.
Ever satisfied, independent, no attachment to results.
Further.
So Krishna is telling.
Such a man of understanding acts with mind and intelligence perfectly controlled.
Gives up all sense of proprietorship over his possessions and acts only for the bare necessities of life.
Thus working he is not affected by sinful reactions.
When we act.
Are we acting with our mind and intelligence controlled or they are controlling us.
So usually we see our mind controls us.
Mind takes us somewhere and then we reach out to satisfy the mind.
But such a man he acts with mind and intelligence controlled.
He knows where should I apply my mind.
He is always able to focus his mind on Krishna.
His intelligence is always engaged as per his desire to serve Krishna.
And this line is very important.
That was several pretty good.
But it means sense of proprietorship over possessions.
So many people are dying every moment.
So if somebody has died this moment, do we feel pain in the death of the person?
No.
But if our brother, sister, father, mother, son, daughter, they pass away.
Then we will cry. We'll feel very bad. Why?
Because of proprietorship.
I think they belong to me. They are mine.
I am this body and those things or objects people connected to body.
They are mine.
So when a person thinks this person belongs to me and something happens to that person he is affected badly.
And if a person thinks this he does not or she does not belong to me.
Anything is happening to that person we are not at all bothered.
Not at all bothered. So many dead diseases are happening but not bothered.
To human beings, to animals we are not bothered.
To plants we are not bothered.
Rather we can harm them.
But I want to protect few things, few places, few people whom I think I am their possessor.
They belong to me. They are my son, my daughter, my father, my mother.
My money.
Suppose some robbery happens at neighbor's house.
We may feel very glad.
So you may feel happy.
Because it is not my money. Somebody's money has gone.
So much robbery is happening always.
But we are not bothered because my money is not gone.
But if some money goes which I think it belongs to me then I will feel very bad.
I will come in stress.
So that is why all the stress that we feel is because I think it belongs to me.
The body belongs to me.
So if something happens to the body I am in great stress.
So a devotee thinks this body also does not belong to me.
So unduly it does not work very hard even for maintaining the body.
Because this body belongs to Krishna.
For service of Krishna he will work only for the bare necessities of life.
Just see the third line. This is also very important.
So how a person should act? People tell,
Why we are objecting karma?
So first thing we understood karma in bodily concept it is inaction.
Another thing is even if you consider doing karma it should be only for God is telling.
See very important it is.
If you want to engage in activities it should be only for keeping the body and soul together.
That much a person is allowed because this body also belongs to Krishna.
So you engage in the service of Krishna and then you can enjoy.
You want enjoyment that is okay.
But when you engage this body in service of Krishna are we satisfied?
So this is the way of a person in perfect knowledge.
He understands nothing belongs to me.
Why I am claiming proprietorship over my money.
This money I produce with my body and mind.
Did I manufacture this body and mind in some industry in heaven or hell or some place before taking this body?
No, I do not know even the science how to manufacture mind and body and brain.
So somebody has given me this brain body skills.
So with this machine I'm producing something.
How can I claim it belongs to me?
Somebody assembles a computer laptop or a phone in factory.
And then the worker is carrying said I manufactured assembled it.
So it is it belongs to me.
So that would be considered a criminal criminal activity.
Similarly, if a person claims proprietorship or the results produced from this body that is sinful activity.
So we have to understand this is very important point.
Nothing belongs to us what we have produced from this mind and body.
Everything belongs to Krishna.
The money doesn't belong to us.
The property doesn't belong to us.
The children don't belong to us.
Everyone belongs to Krishna.
Everything and everyone should be engaged in Krishna service.
When a person is engaged in such a manner, then he is not affected by sinful reactions.
If a person works anything more than maintaining body and soul together, extra enjoyment, then sinful.
He is breaking the laws of nature.
Then suffering will come upon him.
Mind and intelligence are not controlled.
Sense of proprietorship is not given up.
Then sinful reactions will come.
So when a person is in perfect knowledge, he understands this machine does not belong to me.
Anything which I produce out of it.
How can I claim proprietorship over it?
It doesn't belong to me.
And thus, because he is in this understanding, he is very, very peaceful and happy.
Why a cashier sitting in the bank?
He is not at all disturbed.
He does not claim proprietorship over the money.
He is very, very peaceful.
Because he understands this money does not belong to me.
I am collecting on behalf of Krishna.
So this is the understanding with which we should work.
Then a person is very peaceful.
It is staying, it is okay, it is going, it is okay.
One who is satisfied with gain, which comes of its own accord, who is free from duality and does not envy,
who is steady both in success and failure, is never entangled, all the performing actions.
So the devotee, the spiritualist, man in full knowledge, is very, very active.
He might be very, very active physically, spiritually always he is active.
But even though he is performing actions, it is explained here,
he is satisfied with gain, which comes of its own accord.
So Prashila Prabhupada mentions here.
He neither begs nor borrows, but he labors honestly as far as in his power,
and is satisfied with whatever is obtained by his own honest labor.
So we are very, very fond of begging and borrowing.
Marriage starts with a loan.
Then child comes out, there is education loan.
Then there is house loan, then there is car loan, then loan, pay loan, pay loan, so many loans.
So this is the sign of ignorance.
We are so greedy.
We do not understand how much great risk I am taking.
If I am following Krishna Consciousness nicely, I am going to get liberated.
But if I have taken this money and I don't return to that person, I might die anytime.
And if I die without returning it, I have to come back again to settle the amount many folds in next life.
So that is why people were very, very cautious.
I do not want to beg or borrow.
And anyway, we cannot change our destiny by begging or borrowing.
So it is only done in ignorance.
There could be some emergency, but a person who is in full knowledge, he should not beg.
He should not borrow.
Now you may ask why Prabhuddin sannyasis, brahmacharis do go and beg, not for themselves.
They are satisfied.
One thing is begging brings humility to a person.
So brahmachari start to become humble.
The son of a king, if he's going like a beggar, he will become very, very humble.
So for humility, maintaining humility, devotees, brahmacharis, sannyasis, they go out and they may do begging.
So when we are initiated, so although now begging could be difficult,
especially in the Western countries, they may shoot you also without permission.
You enter in India, they will not shoot.
At least they may let the dogs lose at times.
So it is not very easy to beg now.
But nevertheless, devotees still when they are initiated, they go out and they beg.
And otherwise also they try to meet in a gentle way and try to beg.
So this is very, very important.
Firstly, to keep once humility intact.
Another thing is to engage other people in Krishna consciousness and to preach them Krishna consciousness.
When a person engages his money in Krishna service, he advances in spiritual life.
Otherwise, it is not required at all.
So a person who is doing job, who is a householder, regular thing,
he is not a renunciant, not a sannyasi, not a brahmachari.
He should never beg. He should not borrow.
So he should be satisfied with gain which comes of its own accord.
Who is free from duality and does not envy.
Now this is also a very important word.
So a great illusion is there upon the living entities.
They think there is some happiness, but actually there is no happiness.
The Shastras mention just like the three whose head is dunked in water
and just when the water is about to enter his mouth, he is given some relief.
His head is pulled out for a while.
Relief. And then again, before he has actually enjoyed his relief again, the head is dunked back in water.
So this is material life.
A person is highly stressed during the five days of work.
Then Saturday weekend he enjoys a lot.
He is very happy on Friday evening or Saturday depending upon the work days.
He is why you are happy because you are so much tortured five days.
So you are enjoying.
So those people who don't work, for them it is no special.
It does not bring any enjoyment.
For a student, as soon as examinations are over, he feels lot of pleasure, great relief.
What is pleasure?
Because there was suffering of exam, the vacations give pleasure.
If there is no suffering of exam, there is no enjoyment of vacation.
So thus Shastras still foolish person.
The same thing what you are taking as enjoyment.
It is misery. They are same thing.
Your association with the matter, your association with the exam is producing this happiness or distress.
It is the same thing, two sides of the same coin, happiness and distress.
Without experiencing happiness, nobody can experience distress here.
And without experiencing distress, nobody can feel happiness here.
A person who is born rich, money will not make him happy.
So thus it is a great illusion.
There is no happiness actually.
So all these shlokas are so nice.
So a person who is actually in perfect knowledge, he is free from all duality.
He does not fall for this happiness, pains and pleasures.
He understands both are illusion.
He simply works for the satisfaction of Krishna.
In service of Krishna, name, fame comes, he tolerates.
He does not become very happy by name, fame, money, success and all.
He fails. Money goes away.
Name, fame also goes away.
For Krishna, he can take up infamy also.
So gopis were not bothered.
Let people call us ill names, but we will serve Krishna very nicely.
So infamy also may come, but devotee is not bothered.
So free from duality.
They understand name, fame, their sides of the same coin.
There is no difference.
And he does not envy anyone.
Envy means other person advances more than me.
My heart burns.
Other person is not advancing, then I am satisfied.
Comparison. He is free from this envy.
Thus he study both in success and failure.
He is never entangled.
All the performing actions.
Then why does he act if he is not at all affected by the reactions?
For the satisfaction of Krishna, for sacrifice.
The work of a man who is unattached to the modes of material nature
and who is fully attached to transcendental knowledge
merges entirely into transcendence.
So thus, very important shloka.
The work need not be changed.
Work merges into transcendence.
Work changes its nature.
Work becomes spiritual.
So beautiful example Prabhupada is giving in purport.
The same substance milk may create indigestion in the body.
And the same substance will give you relief from that indigestion with transformation.
You transform the milk into curds and the curd is medicine for the diseases
which are created by over dosage of milk.
Substance is same.
When administered in a transformed form, it cures the disease created by original form.
In a similar fashion, our activities for my personal sense satisfaction
are the cause of all the miseries that we have in this world.
All the miseries are only because we act for satisfaction of senses which are never satisfied.
We break the laws of nature in satisfying them.
So same work will liberate us, will bring us out of our misery.
But you have to change the nature of work.
You have to merge the work from materialism to transcendence.
You make the work spiritual, transform the work.
So Krishna Consciousness does not mean change of substance or change of place position.
It is changing of nature.
Simply spiritualize all your activities by engaging in the service of Krishna.
A person who is fully absorbed in Krishna Consciousness is sure to attain the spiritual kingdom
because of his full contribution to spiritual activities
in which the consummation is absolute and that which is offered is of the same spiritual nature.
So what does this shloka mean?
Everything is Brahman.
So actually there is nothing but Krishna and his energy which is called Brahma.
What we perceive matter is illusion.
The same Brahma, same spirit, Brahma Jyoti, when we are illusioned,
when covered by Maya, it is perceived as matter.
So a person because he is completely absorbed in Krishna Consciousness,
he is out of illusion and then he sees everything as Brahma, everything as spiritual energy.
There is nothing material for him.
Thus devotee, even though living in this material world,
his life is completely full of happiness.
So these are the actions of a man in perfect knowledge.
So please read these shlokas over and over again and try to imbibe in our life.
It may appear to be tough, although with some sincere practice,
all these things will become very very natural to all of us.
But please try to follow as far as possible.
