Why God doesn't talk to me?
Why we cannot see God?
Why is it so difficult to understand God?
Had it been, you know, if it is...
If God wants us to understand, He should have made things so easy.
He should have spoken to us.
And if He displays His form, He speaks to us,
then very easily everybody will fall in place. Everyone will follow.
Things will fall in place.
So why it does not happen?
Why this reciprocation is so difficult?
So I will share one story with you.
So this is very nice story and it is not story, it is rather history.
And very important one.
Shri Prabhupada also mentions in his lectures.
And there is very strong evidence of it as well.
So long ago in the erstwhile Bengal,
Bengal means it was current West Bengal, Orissa, Bihar, everything put together.
It was forming the major chunk in the Bharat Varsha.
It was a country in itself.
So from Bengal,
around current Orissa, two Brahmanas were there.
One was a very old Brahmana.
Another person was relatively young, unmarried bachelor.
And both of them, they started towards Vrindavan on a pilgrimage.
So pilgrimage wasn't very easy as now we just book a flight or we have a ticket of a train.
And then we easily go on and have darshan.
It was very amazing when we visited Govardhan Parikrama some time back.
Unfortunately I could not get chance of Parikrama before.
So it was my first Parikrama couple of years ago, although Vrindavan we visit every year.
So many many people were doing Parikrama also in their cars or in some other vehicles.
So it is very nice.
So in your vehicle you can do Parikrama now.
And very easily you can reach the spot.
Otherwise earlier when people would go for pilgrimage, usually the elderly people would go
because human life is meant to dedicate ourselves completely to God.
So obviously lot many attractions are there.
We want to enjoy our senses.
So it is allowed.
Okay, you try it.
And then when you realize it is not satisfying at the old age, all those things try.
I had some education that service of God only brings satisfaction.
So okay, let me engage now.
And old people would go for pilgrimage.
So when the family members would see them off, they were expecting they may not come back
because it is very difficult.
Alone you have to travel and so many days you have to travel.
There is no assurance they would ever return.
So these people also set out for Vrindavan Yatra on foot.
And as usual they encountered many dangers on the way.
And old Brahmana, he was always held by the young Brahmana.
And when finally they reached the Vrindavan temple.
In Vrindavan if you visit now, one of the oldest temples is that of Govind Dev Ji.
So Vrindavan after Krishna left this planet, it became completely deserted.
It turned back into a jungle.
And all the important deities which were being worshipped there because of the fear of Muslims,
they were attacking the deities, desecrating the deities.
So the devotees hit the deities and they left Vrindavan.
So it became complete jungle.
And after that the six Goswamis who are our predecessor Acharyas,
the immediate disciples of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
they were given the responsibility by Lord Chaitanya to re-excavate all those places
and to re-discover the deities which were hidden somewhere in the jungle
because of the fear of Aurangzeb, his party and not Aurangzeb, before that other invaders came.
Aurangzeb was later.
So because of the fear of Mughal invaders.
So Goswamis were given the responsibility to re-excavate Vrindavan.
So one of the first deities, first temples which was established was Govind Dev Ji temples.
It was a huge temple. It still is a huge temple.
That time it was seven stories tall.
And so Aurangzeb when he saw from his palace that what is this thing?
Such a high building.
Only palace should be so high.
And when he got to know it is temple, he became even more envious.
He ordered his soldiers go and break the temple apart.
And the temple was so strong, so nicely built.
They could only break the top four stories.
The three stories still exist there.
So where the Govind Dev Ji temple is there?
In the same site there was a temple of Gopal Ji.
And very famous temple it was at that time.
So these both Brahmanas, they visited the Gopal Ji temple.
And they became very happy.
They became ecstatic.
This instance is from Chaitanya Charita Amrita which is very authorised book.
So it is a history.
So they became ecstatic and they started singing and dancing.
And the elderly Brahmana, he was very thankful that because of you I am,
otherwise I would not have made it to this point.
To have personally darshan of Lord Krishna and Vrindavan is holi dham.
So I am very glad with your seva.
Please let me know how can I serve you?
I am very much obliged.
So young Brahmana told, no, no, it was my duty.
I have just done my duty.
Please don't bother.
He told, no, no, I want to give you something.
Please ask.
Okay, you will not ask.
So let me promise.
I will offer my young daughter to you in charity.
It means he wanted him to become his son-in-law.
But although the elderly Brahmana, he promised the younger Brahmana,
he was a little sceptical and he understood because that other Brahmana,
he was very, very respectable person and very learned person,
aristocratic Brahmana.
And this other person was not very rich and belonging to ordinary family.
So his class would not meet the class of elderly Brahmana.
So his class would not meet the class of elderly Brahmana.
So obviously he was understanding there would be difficulties in our marriage.
Relatives may not agree.
Society may not agree.
So you told, please, you be careful what you are speaking.
No, no, I promise you.
I promise I will give my daughter to you.
So and he bore witness in front of Gopal Ji that in front of Gopal Gopal Ji,
I'm promising that I am going to offer my daughter to you.
So you told, it's okay, if you want to give your daughter to me,
I'll accept her gladly.
And then they came back from Rindavan after having elaborated darshan
of many other spots also.
So when they came back and the elderly Brahmana,
he disclosed the fact to his family members that I have decided
I will offer the hand of my daughter to this Brahmana.
So all of them, they became enraged.
Why started telling I will commit suicide?
What have you promised?
Why you did this thing?
And the son of Brahmana, he was an atheist and not very advanced in spiritual life.
So he also started shouting at his father and they all disagreed.
No, it is not possible.
What have you promised?
So you told, but promises are promised.
I promised.
So what to do now?
So then the elderly Brahmana's son, he told.
So tell me, was anyone standing nearby when you gave this promise to him?
No, nobody was nearby.
Somebody bore witness to the fact?
Yes, yes, Gopal Ji was there.
Oh, Gopal Ji was a witness.
Then it's all right.
You bring that, you let that young Brahmana come
and let him claim whatever promise you have made.
And then you don't worry.
I will take care of the subject matter.
Because he was thinking that Gopal Ji, anyway, that is a statue made of stone.
So this promise is of no value.
I will tell this person has cheated my father on the way to Vrindavan
and is making false allegations and false claims.
So the time came and the younger Brahmana, he approached.
He told this person is not responding now.
He had promised.
And he was a very simple Brahmana, pure devotee.
And although he was not very much specifically interested in accepting his daughter,
but he was very much worried about the promise of the Brahmana.
Any promise we make, this we do not know.
It is a great sin to break promise.
It is a sin to lie, as we have discussed.
So people are very fond of lying.
We have some appointment.
You ask, where are you?
Yes, yes, I'm on my way.
He would not even have started, but he will tell I'm on the way.
And like this, people are very fond of lying.
They just tell like that.
Oh, yes, I came the other day to your house.
You were not there in the house.
And like that, people keep on telling.
So if you tell lies, immediately mind becomes disturbed.
So these laws of nature are not known to people.
And what to speak of breaking promise.
Now you have agreement.
If you break agreement, stand paper, you have agreement.
You have broken.
You'll be penalized for the action.
So we need not sign on papers.
The law of nature is if anything you have spoken from your mouth, you don't keep that word.
We will be punished.
These people do not know.
So anyway, so this Brahmana was knowing the fact.
And specifically, when he has taken a vow before the deity, great disaster will happen in his spiritual life if he does not follow.
So that's keeping the consideration that young elderly Brahmana would suffer.
He approached him and he requested, sir, you have forgotten.
You promised you will offer your daughter to me.
So please keep your promise now because Gopal Ji was there.
And this Brahmana was silent.
He could not speak.
So he understood something is fishy.
And then immediately son came in picture and then he told what is happening here.
He told this issue.
Your father had promised.
I have come back to claim your sister.
So then he started shouting.
He created a scene.
He created. He called all the villagers.
See this Brahmana, this young Brahmana from ordinary family.
He has made a plot.
He has cheated my father.
And in this way, he wants the hand of my daughter illegally.
So then all the people assembled.
Such promise was there.
Was there any witness?
So he told, yes, witnesses there.
Gopal Ji was the witness.
So then the son told Gopal Ji is a witness.
OK, so let the witness come.
And if Gopal Ji testifies here, then I will offer my sister to you.
So he told, OK, no problem.
I will call Gopal Ji.
He's the witness.
He told, OK, please carry on.
And he expected.
Anyway, Deity cannot move stone.
It is simply a stone statue in the temple.
But this young Brahmana, he was a pure devotee.
And he was very, very confident that Gopal Ji would definitely respond.
So the young Brahmana, he went there back to Vrindavan.
And he went and he started speaking to the Deity, revealing his heart to the Deity.
So one of the elements of devotional service, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu recommended 64 elements, items of devotional service in which it should be performed.
Shravanam, Kirtanam, association of devotees, hearing Bhagavatam, chanting the holy names, living in a place where Krishna personally lives.
So all these are very, very important items.
And among such 64 items, one item is revealing your heart before the Deity.
He started revealing his heart before the Deity that, look, this is what is happening and you have witnessed everything.
Now you please come with me and you give a testimony in front of all the villagers so we can save the elderly Brahmana from committing this gross mistake.
So Gopal Ji told, what are you talking?
Have you ever seen any Deity walking? You want me to come along with you and walk such a great distance?
So you told, look Gopal Ji, if Deity can talk, Deity can walk also. So you please come with me.
So bound by the affection of his devotees, Gopal Ji agreed to come with the young Brahmana.
And he told, okay, I will come, but please there is one condition. Okay, what is the condition?
Please do not turn back and look at me. I will keep on walking, but how will I know that you are walking?
So you told, no, I have these jingle bells, ankle bells and by their jingles you will make out that I am walking behind you.
And meanwhile, when we are walking, every day you cook something and you offer to me.
You keep on offering bhoga to me, but don't look behind. So you told, okay, agreed.
And then in this way Gopal Ji started walking behind the Brahmana.
And he was very happy. He was always meditating upon Gopal Ji.
In this way they came to the border of the place, of the village.
And then suddenly the Brahmana, he doubted that the sound is not coming of the ankle bells anymore.
So just he turned back. And when he turned back, immediately he saw Gopal Ji smiling, standing tall over there at the place.
And anyway, he had reached the border of the village. So immediately he ran to the village and he told all the people,
see Gopal Ji has come, Gopal Ji has come. You are telling that who is the witness?
The witness Gopal has come. And all the villagers were astonished because Gopal Ji was very famous deity of Vrindavan.
They all were knowing very well Gopal Ji they had visited.
And when they saw Gopal Ji practically standing there, then they were very big, huge deity.
Even now the temple is there, Sakshi Gopal temple near Jagannath Puri.
So if you come on trip with us, we will definitely show you the place.
So very famous temple, very big, huge deity, not possible that a person can carry or somehow you can bring it.
And everyone was surprised. And on the other hand in Vrindavan people are surprised, the deity is stolen, deity is missing.
Where is the deity? And then gradually the news spread everywhere, the king got to know.
And thus a great temple was established in that place for Gopal Ji.
And the deity is still standing there and the temple was also there.
And in that site now we have Govind Dev Ji temple.
So this is the great history where Gopal Ji personally came and he gave testimony.
He bore witness to the Brahmanas and he told both of you are my pure devotees.
You are always my associates.
So because of some pastimes in order to attract the conditioned souls like us, Krishna comes along with his pure devotees.
So that we can develop faith and also follow in their footsteps.
Like this, many, many instances are there.
Especially we go to places where we have so many dhamas, places of pilgrimage.
There are many, many pastimes of reciprocation of deities you will find.
And many such pastimes we have discussed before.
All the deities which were lost in Vrindavan, they personally guided.
As we discussed the pastime of Srinath Ji who was also known as Gopal Ji.
He guided personally Madhavendra Puri.
I am feeling very hot here.
He offered milk to Madhavendra Puri and then he guided.
They had to wait through the jungle, cut across the bushes and then they reached the deity.
In this way, many, many personal reciprocations are there.
The Radharaman Ji deity of Vrindavan, Shri Prabhupada tells, if you have to learn deity standards, you please learn from Radharaman temple.
They follow deity worship very nicely.
Very big temple. One of the seven Vrindavan is 5000 temples.
And seven most important temples are there.
Among them one is Radharaman temple.
Radharaman Ji is one of the most beautiful and very small deity.
This much small it is.
But the features are very, very clear.
The eyes, even the teeth are visible.
The fingers are there playing the flute.
So how this deity came? Who carved this deity?
This deity appeared overnight.
Gopal Bhad Goswami is one of our predecessor Acharyas among the six Goswamis.
He was worshipping the Shaligram Shila.
Shaligram Shila is a special kind of stone which is incarnation of Krishna in stone form.
Those stones are found in the Gandiki river which now falls in Nepal.
So all those stones which are found in this river, you can directly take it.
There is no need of deity installation, plant pratistha.
That is incarnation of Krishna. Directly you can start worshipping.
So Gopal Bhad Goswami was worshipping the Shaligram Shilas.
And all the other Goswamis were also worshipping and they were very nicely dressing the deities
and doing various upcharas and doing various offerings to the deities,
bathing the deities and all these things.
So the deity which we see in the temple standing as stone, that is not stone.
Krishna has taken the form of a stone.
So two purposes are solved.
Some people who are devotees of Krishna who want to serve, they can serve in that form.
Krishna talks, walks with them as it happened in this case.
And some people, most of us, we are atheists of the highest order.
We don't want to believe in God, we want to become God.
So to such people they see it is only a stone there.
So both purposes are solved.
So thus Krishna takes these forms.
And to other people who are willing to see God, but they cannot see spirit,
So God takes the form of a matter which we can see.
Stone we can see, so God comes and stands in the form of stone.
So those who want to start serving Krishna, they can also take the opportunity.
Thus this special incarnation which is called Archaavatara is taken by Krishna.
It is not stone, it is avatar.
So when Gopal Bhad Goswami was seeing all the other Goswamis very nicely serving Krishna personally,
just like we served our loved ones, we take great pleasure in serving them.
Similarly, devotees take great pleasure in serving the deities.
So Gopal Bhad Goswami became little morose that I do not have such opportunity to offer dresses,
bathing, abhishekam and all other upcharas, bhoga to Krishna.
So how do I do it?
And in this way he was contemplating.
And it was Narsimha Chaturdashi.
That day Narsimha appeared from pillar.
And he was just seeing how Krishna appeared to please his devotee out of a pillar.
So how fortunate was Prahlad Maharaj if I also have such fortune of worshipping personally Krishna.
And then Gopal Bhad Goswami saw the other day one of its shilas.
He had some 11 or 12 shilas.
And one of the Shaligram Shilas it got converted into Gopal Ji deity.
How he got to know it is one of the Shaligram Shilas only?
Because on the back of Radharamanji there is half Shaligram Shila still.
So the number got reduced by one and on the back there was still that Shila which he was worshipping.
And Gopal Ji's beautiful form it manifested.
So we all can see this temple, Radharaman temple and have blessings of Radharamanji also when we visit Vrindavan in our next trip.
So all these wonderful reciprocations are there of the deities which we cannot deny.
Many many examples are there.
Even now today also they happen with many devotees.
So the question is why it doesn't happen with everyone and anyone?
And what is that God is willing to have from a person in order to offer these wonderful reciprocations?
What is the cost of these rewards which many many devotees have got and are getting now also?
So the answer Lord Krishna gives in this beautiful Shloka of Bhagavad Gita which we are going to see now.
So let us see very carefully.
So we are continuing to read the fourth chapter Transcendental Knowledge.
We covered 10 verses.
Lord Krishna has explained his wonderful position.
We have taken birth. How? From our father and mother.
How they have taken birth? From their father and mother.
In this way you keep on tracing when you come to a point a person who has no father and mother who has not taken birth then that is God.
So Lord Krishna declares that Ajaah I am unborn. I do not take birth. I appear and disappear.
I can appear through form of a woman, through my devotee like Devaki.
I can appear out of pillar. I can appear out of Shaligram also.
So Krishna appears and disappears. Krishna does not take birth.
So Krishna declared here clearly I am Ajaah.
I am the Lord of all the matter and all the living entities.
But still I appear here. Why do I appear? Krishna that also he explained.
To establish the Dharma, the principles by which everyone can become unconditionally happy.
To establish, give that knowledge to people and to reciprocate with his devotees Krishna appears here.
And how does he reciprocate? That Krishna is explaining now in this verse.
Verse number 11
Translation
All of them as they surrender unto me I reward accordingly.
Everyone follows my path in all respects O son of Pritha.
So here Lord Krishna is telling
This word is very very important.
Bhajami means I reward or I reciprocate.
I reciprocate or I reward. Basis what?
As they surrender unto me.
So Lord Krishna has spoken so much of knowledge in Bhagavad Gita.
He started explaining the process of Karma Yoga.
Then now he is explaining Jnana Yoga, Sankhya Yoga.
He will explain Dhyana also in coming chapters, 6th chapter.
Then he explains finally Bhakti Yoga. So many instructions he gives.
So Krishna tells this is very important instruction.
Then Krishna tells this is secret instruction.
What is secret instruction? Very confidential instruction Krishna gives.
At the end of Bhagavad Gita, 18th chapter.
Is the knowledge of spirit soul being different from Krishna.
Knowledge of Brahma.
Aham Brahma asked me I am not the body I am spirit soul.
As soon as a person realizes this thing.
Brahma Bhuta Prasannatma he becomes completely happy.
As soon as we realize I have got nothing to do with this world.
I am spirit soul. Aham Brahma asked me.
Practical realization the person becomes immediately happy.
So this knowledge is very secret knowledge.
It is not easy to realize.
Just like we have discussed this example of Shrimad Bhagavatam before also.
A person who is soil expert, expert in knowledge of metallurgy.
He can make out this soil has got gold particle in it.
This is not ordinary soil.
Similarly under the guidance of an expert spiritual master Paramhansa.
Living entity ordinary soul can make out.
This matter is not ordinary matter.
There is not like some table or stone or wood.
This matter is special.
There is small Brahma particle spiritual spark present in this body.
So but we need to take expert guidance of a spiritual scientist.
A spiritual master.
Then we will be able to understand this very confidential knowledge.
Secret knowledge.
And then Lord Krishna tells.
This is not the end of spiritual realization.
I am not the body can be realized without the help of spiritual master.
Also if the person is very Satvik regulated in his life.
Very intelligent and thoughtful.
If the senses are controlled, mind are controlled.
Person is intelligent, thoughtful, regulated, Satvik.
He can understand after a long time that I am not the body.
This is called Guhyam.
And beyond Guhyam knowledge there is Guhyataram.
Guhyataram means more secret, more confidential knowledge.
What is that?
When a person realizes I am not the body, I am Atma within this body.
There is one more aspect to understand.
And that is Paramatma.
There are two souls within this body.
Infinite soul and infinitesimal soul.
God is infinite, Paramatma.
He is also present in our heart.
And then there is another soul that is we.
Anu Atma and Vibhu Atma.
Both are present.
So when the living entity is able to realize the God is present in my heart.
Within this body.
He is directing the wandering of all the living entities in various bodies, life after life.
This is called Paramatma realization.
We realize that there is one supreme soul living within my heart.
This is even further advanced knowledge.
The Jnani yogis, Jnani yogis, they are able to understand I am not the body.
Dhyani yogis, Ashtangi yogis, they are able to realize the presence of Paramatma within the heart.
And finally Lord Krishna tells
Now here the most secret knowledge.
The top most confidential knowledge of Bhagavad Gita.
Because Arjuna was putting forth various arguments.
This is also Dharma. That is also Dharma.
This is also knowledge.
We should not fight with our relatives.
We should not fight with elderly people.
We should not offend them.
And then the family lineage culture would be destroyed.
Varnashrama will take birth.
Women will be unprotected.
So many dharmas he was quoting.
So Lord Krishna told here now the top most Dharma, the top most knowledge.
What is that top most knowledge?
Krishna told 18th chapter, verse number 66, 65 and 66.
Most confidential knowledge.
So we are all suffering not because of any immediate reason.
Now this is most confidential knowledge.
We are working very very hard.
Sometimes some devotees are not able to understand.
The other day some devotees, I got the feedback.
They were telling, Prabhu you are over critical.
And while you are criticizing, somebody is working very hard for his career, for his job.
He's doing his karma, doing this thing.
Similarly, when Prabhupada came to Mumbai and Prabhupada was hugely famous.
Mayor came to receive him on the airport.
And all the shops were closed to receive Prabhupada.
And it was a festival in the town.
And in Mumbai also when Prabhupada came, huge crowd.
That time 20,000 people they assembled.
It was very unheard of.
20,000 people they assembled in the pandal program to hear Prabhupada.
And then Prabhupada simply repeated the instructions of Bhagavatam, which is very very hard to bear at times.
Cats, dogs and this thing, all the wonderful designations which are offered to non-devotees and a materialist in Bhagavatam.
Prabhupada repeated.
And next day, immediately from 20,000 it became 10,000.
And the disciples told, Prabhupada, if we speak, then people may not turn up at all.
So Prabhupada told, I have not come here to please people.
I have come here to please Krishna.
If Krishna is pleased, he can impart devotional service to anybody and everybody.
Similarly, one very famous band, rock band, just like Beatles were there, devotees invited another very famous group of musicians to meet Prabhupada.
And then Prabhupada was very hard upon illicit sex life, which was very prominent and is still prominent in America.
Now it is coming to India also.
Without any restriction, people indulge in gross physical enjoyment.
And obviously, when they heard, they never came back again.
So Prabhupada would have spoken softly.
Gradually, he would have brought them to the point.
So again, Prabhupada repeated the same thing.
Prabhupada told, I have not come here to please the Americans.
I have come here to please Krishna.
If Krishna is pleased, then Americans, Indians, everyone will be pleased automatically.
And eventually we saw how so many people now they have become devotees.
They are becoming devotees.
And similarly, Srila Prabhupada's spiritual master, Bhaktisdhan Maharaj, he also, people would criticize him.
They would call chopping technique his preaching methods because he was very straightforward and cut to cut, he would speak.
So Prabhupada always told that this Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's movement, Vedas offer opportunity to various living entities, various chances.
That is why let us see the shlokas and then I will explain more about it.
Men in this world desire success in fruitive activities and therefore they worship the demigods.
Quickly, of course, men get results from fruitive work in this world.
So there is a misconception in our country and in people of other countries about Sanatana Dharma that we imagine any kind of any form as form of God and we worship it.
Sanatana Dharma offers liberty to worship God in any form and all the devatas, they are different forms of the same God.
This is not correct as per the declaration of Bhagavad Gita in various scriptures also.
So Krishna is telling, however, because people want material benefits and they get very quick success by worshiping the devatas.
So Krishna is telling therefore they worship demigods.
They want quick success. Immediately I want to become happy. Quick result.
Allopathy, your immediately the symptoms subside, but that is very disastrous in the long term, many side effects.
Other bona fide ways of medicine, Ayurveda may take some time, but very effective and cures at the root cause.
Similarly, quick result, quick happiness you want. So people worship demigods, Krishna is telling.
So for gradual elevation of people to the path of knowledge, Krishna tells,
According to the three modes of material nature and the work ascribed to them, the four divisions of human society were created by me.
Now, please read this very carefully.
A very great leader of our country, he burnt Manusahita, the very important scripture.
Indian penal code is based on that only and many of the laws of Hindu act.
So these various Dharma Shastras like Manusahita, they explain the laws which should govern.
The actions, the conduct of the human beings on this planet.
But somehow people could not understand the actual meaning and they thought it is promoting casteism.
This is caste people were divided. They were not allowed to do certain higher kind of jobs and some people were considered low born basis their birth.
So this is wrong understanding caste system is never mentioned in Bhagavad Gita Manusahita or any of the Vedas.
It is wrong interpretation or translation, maybe by Max Miller or some Britishers they would have read.
So here you can see very clearly the management of society in which society can be very peaceful and happy.
This capitalism, socialism, communism, everything is creating a lot of stress.
We see in China, people are revolting in Russia.
People are unhappy with a heavy handed deal with their people in America.
In America again people are unhappy. If you have socialism, capitalism, so much of competition is there that people become restless as we discussed in the previous session.
For some exam people are people started working earlier they would just work for six months for that it became one year then two years, four years now six years.
And now some people are telling from the age of seven years you start teaching your child coding and now where is the end for it.
This tremendous competition is creating so much anxiety and disturbance in people's lives.
This is socialism and communism.
There is another difficulty in democracy.
Anyway, we are seeing so many other difficulties are there.
So the best management of society is Varnashrama system by which people can be happy.
Sustainable development is there.
So Krishna tells who has created the system communism Karl Marx Lenin.
They are the original people who started this thought socialism.
Some other philosophers are there who has created this Varnashrama who thought Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra, Brahmachari,
who divided who decided all these.
Who has designed all these things.
This is what who has defined all these duties.
Who has defined this management system.
Krishna tells I have created this thing.
So God wants the society to run in this particular fashion.
Now God has not decided basis.
Please read in the second line.
Krishna tells Guna Karma Vibhagasha.
Guna means three modes of material nature or the quality.
Here you can see quality.
The quality is depend on three modes of nature.
And Karma means work.
So very easily we can understand now also society is divided basis.
This only some people have the quality of teaching and they are doing the job of teaching.
They are called professors.
So we have a class of professors and they are very much important to impart knowledge.
Some people have the quality of doing business and they are engaged in doing business.
Guna and Karma both of business.
They are called businessmen.
Very important again.
Some people have the quality.
I know business is not my cup of tea.
I can just do job workers.
So they they are also important in society.
There is a working class.
There is business class.
There is teaching class.
These classes are anywhere there.
So similarly Krishna is telling now what is the difference between Varnashrama.
There also Brahmana means teaching class.
Here also we have teaching class.
So what is special in the system.
The speciality is if you have to become a teacher.
There are few characteristics you need to show and display.
Simply by mugging up some books you cannot become a teacher.
So some duties rules and regulations are there.
Why these rules and regulations are there.
That is also mentioned again in Bhagavad Gita also will mention.
And Bhagavatam other Vedas also mentioned.
Therefore the best of the Brahmanas in a conference it was being discussed.
Why this Varnashrama is there in the society.
What is the ultimate objective of this thing.
The objective is some Siddhi.
Some Siddhi means the top most perfection.
Hari Toshanam the pleasure of Hari.
Ultimately the society has been divided in this way so that Hari can be pleased.
Why do we criticize if some people
simply keep on working without focusing on Krishna Consciousness.
Because again Bhagavatam mentions.
If a person does his duties very very nicely perfectly.
If attraction to hear about Krishna does not awaken.
It is useless endeavor.
All such doing all such studies all such education or our job or business.
If it does not awaken strong desire to hear about Krishna that is useless waste of time.
Why because our heart will not be satisfied unless we fall in love.
Unless we fall in love with God.
We all know what is the satisfaction that we have when we fall in love.
So in order to have a sustained and much much many fold expanded satisfaction.
We need to fall in love with God.
That is what will satisfy us.
So the Vedas have been written for gradual progression.
Ultimately Krishna reciprocates basis the surrender of the living entity.
But not everyone can surrender to Krishna because to understand Krishna itself is so difficult.
Anybody who understands Krishna he will be liberated.
And to understand Krishna person should be free from all attachment.
Free from all fear and free from all anger free from fear.
No fear should be there alone in the middle of the night dead of night in jungle.
You should be able to live.
You should not worry some animals may come decoits may come ghosts may come.
That is called sannyasi alone not in group that okay 12 people sit together wheelchairs away the tiger.
No alone dhyana yoga is practiced alone.
So alone you be there in jungle bhakti yoga dhyana yoga whatever you are following dhyana yoga alone you live in jungle.
And it is very dark.
Many dangers can be there but you should be fearless depend upon God.
When God is seeing this person is totally surrendered he will guide the animals not to disturb.
That is how sannyasis would live in the jungles.
So fearless a person should be a person should be completely free of anger person should obviously be free of all attachments.
Then you can understand.
So where is the scope of understanding Krishna without understanding how you can surrender.
So in order to help a living entity in the path of surrender which is a cost of reward of Krishna consciousness.
This system is established over national system.
Varnashrama is not meant for satisfying our senses because that anyway will not satisfy us.
But you satisfy also you are safe from the side effects of sense gratification.
And slowly you will be able to understand Krishna and surrender to Krishna.
It starts with shudra level working class.
You do only one thing no need for you to follow brahmacharya also just follow rules and regulations of grahasth ashram very nicely and be very faithful to your employer.
Even if you don't get salary don't get payment.
Still you keep on serving in this one duty you have to do this one regulation you follow that is called shudra regulation.
If he follows that nicely in that life or the next life he would be promoted to higher consciousness.
Vaishya kshatriya brahmana then he will understand I am not the body then Vaishnava he'll be able to surrender to Krishna and understand.
So this is what we does recommend.
However Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did not appear here to give this gradual process because we cannot follow this gradual process in Kalyoga.
We do not have such time that okay let me follow these regulations like Vishwamitra he was kshatriya and from kshatriya he became brahmana there was so much of time for him.
But so much time and capacity of body is not there so thus all this will not work now.
So that is why Ved Vyas was chastised by Narad Muni.
What nonsense things you have written in the Vedas.
All these rules and regulations people simply get stuck in the rules and regulations.
They will go to temple do some pooja do some sanskaras and they will think I am following religion very very nicely.
You have done abominable work all your work is useless.
One good work you have done writing Bhagavad Gita that itself is hidden in the politics and history of Mahabharat.
So now you write directly about God by which you will be satisfied and people would be satisfied and then came Shrimad Bhagavatam.
So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu simply preached Shrimad Bhagavatam.
We having very less time such great opportunity is not there to follow slow varnashrama system.
So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did not come here for gradual elevation did not come here to make people lukewarm and neophyte devotees.
But he came here to give the very advanced form of devotion.
So this is the mood of all the Acharyas Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Bhaktisdhan Maharaj, Shri Lapa Upad and he told this should be the mood of my disciples also you should not compromise.
People are hankering beating the bush not finding the solution.
You should not cheat them. Please give them directly this thing.
So it does not matter whether people turn up they don't turn up again.
But we should speak the truth. This is what Krishna wants now.
So that is why we are criticizing anything that fall short of complete surrender to Krishna.
So we are discussing why this is most confidential knowledge surrendering to Krishna because we are struggling very hard thinking if I have some more money I'll become happy.
If I divorce this person I marry once again I'll be very happy.
And if I take this course this education I'll be happy if I leave this country go to another country or another planet I'd be I'll be happy.
But we do not have knowledge we are suffering because we have broken some laws of nature in the past and the reaction is coming in the form of you may call there could be bad government.
There could be bad family members there could be bad boss or bad subordinate there could be bad weather bad body bad health.
These things are not happening by chance because we have broken laws of nature it is called karma it is happening.
So God does not leave imperfect management.
So thus it is great secret because we have broken laws of nature.
How much ever you may try to work hard find another business job change your place promotion you will not be satisfied.
This is the secret secret is Krishna tells forget all rules and regulations dharma which are mentioned in the Vedas.
Maam ekam sharanam raja ekam only unto me you surrender completely I will free you from all the sins do not worry because people get worried.
Another day one devotee asked that how can I make spiritual advancement.
I told yes you please chant minimum 16 rounds follow four regulative principles do this morning sadhana and if you follow this very very sincerely you will make very fast advancement.
And then I forgot to mention one point he has to offer significant portion of his salary also that I messaged him later.
So then he told to his brother later that he was he stopped coming for the sessions.
He told what happened no no I realize this is our commercialization they want my money and they're telling you offer everything and how will I eat if I offer this much money to Krishna.
So people misunderstand then he told no no you give anywhere need not necessary for the organization this thing but offer it for Krishna.
So we have such deep envy we will surrender to anybody and everybody we will surrender to our boss 10 hours 12 hours every day five days seven days a week.
Boss my 10 hours 12 hours I have surrendered to you whatever task you give I will keep on doing my entire life.
We will keep on we will send it to our boss we will surrender to our senses eyes will demand show me IPL come on come on this class will anyway happen.
Let us see IPL you will surrender we may watch IPL you will surrender to tongue you know if I eat this I will get disease pain in the body some disturbance but still we fall for serving the tongue.
So we surrender to our senses we surrender to our last anger we surrender to our employers we surrender to so many people.
What is the difficulty in surrendering to Krishna.
So there could be a risk involved but we can see from the example of the great people the Kings how much they would have enjoyed why they were taking sannyas and going to jungle and when they go to jungle they are in ecstasy they don't want to come back.
Life is so full of pleasure so there is a risk in surrender so Krishna tells Marsh which I do not worry this is a secret when you surrender completely.
You are all the problems of life are solved and this is the cost of reciprocation to the degree we surrender Krishna reciprocates.
Very very difficult I cannot do that yes actually nobody can do that so that is why five things are prohibited in Kali Yuga one of them is sannyas.
That is also prohibited so sannyas is prohibited because training is not there people cannot do that.
So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu although he is giving direct instruction he is most merciful also in order to facilitate surrender to Krishna.
Krishna here you can see Bhagavad Gita Krishna is little strict first of all you surrender completely then we will talk of spiritual life.
Give up all your wealth all your property everything and surrender completely then we talk first take sannyas but Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is merciful people in Kali Yuga cannot do that.
So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu simply tells one thing niranthara nam lao always keep on chanting the holy names of Krishna very simple regulation.
So don't get scared that I am telling you to go to jungle we are not trying to bring an upheaval in the society stop this field of society.
We are simply telling whatever activities we are doing as Krishna will explain now in the next class we will see.
We should do those activities for the satisfaction of Krishna and we should simply add chanting of holy names in our life.
So need not bother with so many rules and regulations which we anyway cannot follow but this surrender is important.
So for this surrender we have to chant holy names of Krishna in the form of sadhana bhakti.
So we cannot do it completely little sadhana is given to us get up in the morning in Brahmurta before sunrise.
Chant the holy names of Krishna fixed number of rounds read Srimad Bhagavatam and then carry on for your office carry on for your studies.
Then when you come back again read and chant and then you go to bed.
So this sadhana is recommended for us.
So this this little few things we have to follow in our life and simply by following this regulations for chanting and hearing the holy names very nicely 16 rounds for principles reading Bhagavatam associating with devotees.
We will very easily be able to understand Krishna completely and surrender to him also remaining situated in our own place in our own jobs in our own businesses.
So this is the secret for getting reciprocation from Krishna but we have to surrender.
So please try to follow this sadhana bhakti very simple rules of surrender there in Kalyuga.
So do not please ignore this do not skip chanting of the holy names do not ignore reading discussing Bhagavad Gita and Bhagavatam do not ignore associating with devotees.
Do not ignore taking prasadam which is offered to Krishna the simple things you do this must surrender is expected.
The more sincere we are in our that is why sadhana is very important with great commitment.
Even one day I should not fail in following these things.
So to that degree we stick to the sadhana process sadhana bhakti to that degree we'll advance in our spiritual life.
