Chapter 4, Transcendental Knowledge, verse number 14.
Translation
There is no work that affects me, nor do I aspire for the fruits of action. One who understands this truth about me also does not become entangled in the fruitive reactions of work.
All the liberated souls in ancient times acted with this understanding and so attained liberation. Therefore, as the ancients, you should perform your duty in this divine consciousness.
Arjuna was giving so many arguments that this action should not be done, fighting should not be done and Krishna is telling, no, you should fight. So there is lot of argument and debate.
So Lord Krishna here is explaining to Arjuna what is action, what is forbidden action, what is inaction because all this argument is happening around action.
Which kind of action will bring a person happiness? Which kind of action will bring a person bad reaction or distress?
So here Lord Krishna is telling, please understand one thing. What is that thing?
Before understanding about signs of any activity, you understand about me.
There is no work that affects me, nor do I aspire for the fruits of action.
So many people they tell, no, Krishna also was doing so many activities and we should follow in the footsteps. Krishna married 16,000 queens. Let me also marry. If not 16,000, at least 16 you should allow. Why you are not allowing me?
And then they tell, oh no, Krishna had lot of desires to enjoy. That is why he has taken so many queens. So Krishna is telling, no, please understand my nature. I do not aspire for the fruits of action.
Any action that I am doing, when we do any action, we want the result of that activity. I want to marry because the result of marriage I perceive some enjoyment I want.
But Krishna is telling, no, I do not aspire for the fruits of action and there is no work that affects me.
Any work will affect us because we are tightly bound by the laws of nature.
Just like here in this world you do some good work and you may get good position by the government, you crack some good exam or if you break some laws of nature, you would be punished.
But Krishna is not affected by any work because he is the controller of all the energies.
Then why does Krishna engage in such activities that we have seen in the previous class?
So this is very important to understand. Krishna tells, as you surrender, so I reciprocate.
So the soul can have happiness, enjoyment, which we are always hankering for only by engaging in the loving service of God.
Now in whichever way you want to love God and serve God, Krishna is telling, I will reciprocate.
Now all the living entities have a relationship with Krishna and the relationship are of five major types.
Either it is a passive relationship like a tree is there, not actively engaged in Krishna's service, but when Krishna is coming and sitting under a tree, tree derives great pleasure.
So in a similar fashion, living entity can have passive relationship with Krishna or there could be relationship of a servitor like Lord Hanuman, the greatest servant.
There could be relationship of friend, there could be paternal relationship of parents, there could be conjugal relationship like many wives of Krishna, friends of Krishna.
So as the living entity desires to serve, Krishna reciprocates. So Krishna did not go and, it was not Krishna's desire, let me, I want the result of this activity.
I want, I am looking for some enjoyment externally. Krishna is satisfied in his own self. But all these Jeevas, all these souls, they wanted to have Krishna as their husband.
So Krishna told, okay, I will reciprocate. All these queens were kidnapped by Narakasur and they told now because we have been out of our house in Vedic culture, if woman is out of house, then a man would not accept because chastity is very, very important.
So they told now people will not accept us. So you only can accept. So Krishna told, okay, I will accept, not an issue and Krishna married.
So Krishna is not aspiring for the fruits of activities. So if a person understands this science about Krishna that no work can affect Krishna. Some people tell Krishna caused so much violence because of Krishna, so many crores of people were killed.
So there is one religion in which they tell yes, Krishna is our next worshipable personality. But now he is taking punishment because of so much violence that he did on the battlefield.
So once he is freed from the effects of the punishment, then we will start worshipping him. So this is not proper understanding. Although it is good they are willing to worship Krishna, but this understanding is wrong that Krishna is also bound by the laws of Karma.
Krishna is not bound by any laws. There is no work that affects me. It is not easy to understand. That is why Krishna is telling one who understands this truth about me.
So Bhagavad Gita has got so much value because all this is fact, this is factual knowledge. So here Krishna is declaring his features.
One who understands this knowledge, this truth about me, he also becomes freed from the reactions of his work. The law of Karma cannot bind such a person either.
And now Krishna is telling very important thing.
Please don't bother very much about this activity or that activity. First of all understand this primary knowledge, who is the controller of all the activities, who has defined which activity is right and wrong.
I am supreme personality. I am superior to all the laws. So act in this understanding.
All the liberated souls in the ancient times. Now one word is used repeatedly three times here.
So this is very important. So people are very fond of concocting some new ways of spiritual realization.
This spiritual master is very fantastic. He does not have any guru. He is so powerful that he has got this wonderful sadhana, wonderful kriya, wonderful practice, meditation, dhyana.
And you will become liberated by following this practice. However Krishna does not recommend Arjuna to follow any upstart, any new process.
Here Krishna is telling in Bhagavad Gita,
Millions of years ago, I spoke the same knowledge without any change. Because if the knowledge is perfect, where is the need of change?
Krishna is God. Bhagavad Gita is accepted. All the Acharyas have accepted. Even ordinary personalities they accept. People of other religions also they accept.
So Krishna is telling, whatever knowledge Krishna is giving, that knowledge is perfect. Perfect knowledge need not undergo any kind of upgradation.
And thus Krishna confirms here, the same knowledge millions of years ago I have shared and now I am sharing the same thing again.
So in the ancient times people have acted just with this understanding and they have got liberation.
Therefore as the ancients, you should also perform your duty in this divine consciousness.
So this is called parampara. We should simply follow the process which always has been followed for spiritual advancement.
Because science is science. 2 plus 2 will always be 4. C plus O2 will always be CO2. It is not that C plus O2 was N2O before and now it is CO2. No.
So science means the laws will remain the same. The truth always remains the same.
So in a similar fashion, there is soul in this body and how the soul has entered the body, how the soul can be liberated from this body, can come out of all the sufferings, the laws remain the same.
So therefore Krishna is recommending Arjuna, please don't pick up any new process.
So that is why if you come across any process which is new, you can please kindly reject.
Because Krishna when he comes here, he does not tell I am introducing a new process, rather the same old process, millions of years old.
So you also act with the same understanding with which the ancients have acted in the past.
There is no need of inventing something new. This is called parampara knowledge.
The perfect knowledge is coming from the beginning of creation by the creator himself.
So if a person follows that knowledge, then he is very very happy. You should perform your duty in this divine consciousness.
So in order to solve this so much confusion which Arjuna is having about activities, his actions, Krishna now declares in verse number 16.
What is karma and what is akarma? Even intelligent people, they are not able to understand, they get confused, bewildered.
Even the intelligent are bewildered in determining what is action and what is inaction.
Now I shall explain to you what action is, knowing which you shall be liberated from all sins.
So as we discussed before, we are having some problems, any kind of suffering.
There are three sufferings we discuss in Jigyasa sessions.
Adhyatmic, Adhibhautic and Adhidevik.
There is no other suffering. Suffering caused by my mind and body. It has origin in my mind and body.
Suffering originated from other living entities or suffering caused by supernatural factors, the demigods, the earthquake, famines.
There is no other cause of suffering. So either there is some supernatural disturbance, there is disturbance by other living entities, other species.
Or there is disturbance because of this mind and body.
So all these disturbances cannot be solved by any stopgap arrangement because it is because of our sins.
Sins means breaking the laws of nature. So Krishna tells, I will explain to you what action is.
If you know the science of action, you will be liberated from all the sins. There will not be any more suffering in your life.
So such a wonderful knowledge Krishna is going to give. There will not be any more suffering if you understand the science of action.
And it is very, very difficult to understand what is action, what is inaction. Just like the laws are very difficult to understand.
So we were finalizing new agreement for a new house.
So because of pandemic, we have to close many of our centers and settle for small places as those who follow it part time along with their jobs and all.
So they are working from home, most of them.
So in the new agreement, there is some tax thing that you have to give TDS. You must be knowing all this thing.
So when you how sooner we got and the lady was scared. No, no, I don't want to get into tax.
She was in her eye and no Indian tax system. I don't want all this thing. So why people are scared because it is complex.
She told I don't file any returns. Now for this thing, I have to hire a C and do all these things.
It is a simple thing. But nevertheless, she does not want to pay any kind of just become liable to pay any taxes.
So it is very difficult. That is why people have C is so many taxes, very complex. What is legal?
What is illegal? People have lawyers, very difficult to understand the tax system, the legal systems.
So that is why many, many cases they go on for a long time. So this is illegal. This is illegal.
So Krishna tells it is very difficult to understand what is right action, what is wrong action.
So Krishna is telling now I shall explain to you what action is when Krishna explains, then there is no doubt.
So let us see what Krishna is going to explain. Very important verses.
The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore, one should know properly what action is, what forbidden action is and what inaction is.
So Krishna is telling there are three kinds of activities. Three, we were knowing only one activity or maybe two right and wrong.
So Krishna is telling, no, there are three activities which are three karma, vikarma and akarmana. Karma means action.
Vikarma means forbidden action and akarmana means inaction. So these three categories of action are very, very important to know.
That is what Krishna is going to explain now.
God himself is telling the intricacies of action are very hard to understand.
So that is why we understand how if you have some background of Mahabharata history, the personality who is given the charge of making judgment about right and wrong actions and thus giving the result.
He is Yamraj, judge. So people just like the criminals are taken to court.
Those people who break the laws of nature a lot and by some ordinary penalty, few little sufferings directly next body cannot be given.
They have to be taken to the court of Yamraj for special punishment.
So Yamraj also once he gave an apparently wrong decision and thus Yamraj was cursed to become a Shudra here on this planet.
And thus he came here and descended as Vidura. So in his absence, another person was appointed as Yamraj. Yamraj is a post.
So the current person who is holding the post, he had to come down and incarnate as Vidura. And then he went back.
So just imagine the mistake can happen at that level also from judge also.
So the intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore, so it is very hard. So let me not understand at all.
No, it is even more important. It is very hard to spend your time properly to understand because if you do right action, then the result is right.
If you do wrong action, then there is suffering in life.
And then Krishna tells a very mystical shloka, which we had shared in the creative.
Translation. One who sees inaction in action and action in inaction is intelligent among men.
And he is in the transcendental position, although engaged in all sorts of activities.
Now, what does it mean? An ordinary person cannot understand when he sees inaction in action.
So although activity is going on, a person sees there is no activity going on and action in inaction.
Although there is apparently no activity, a person sees activities going on, is intelligent among men.
And he is in the transcendental position, although engaged in all sorts of activities.
So very, very important points Krishna is pointing out here.
So Krishna is telling, first of all, a person who is on liberated platform, just like people get scared.
Oh, if I read this philosophy, I have to leave all the actions.
So Krishna is telling, no, first of all, understand, although engaged in all sorts of activity,
not necessary that a liberated soul will be sitting in Himalayas and silently meditating.
He may be engaged in all sorts of activities.
So how do we understand that a person is liberated if he sees inaction in action and action in inaction?
It means he has a totally reverse perspective about the activities of this world.
So this is very important.
So sometimes the devotees listeners are not able to understand that why the activities are being criticized.
If you read Srimad Bhagavatam, you should read Bhagavatam after finishing Bhagavad Gita.
So Bhagavatam describes what are the activities of a materialist.
So it is described.
So very abominable activities are described.
Bhagavatam is criticizing how the living entity is wasting his time here.
How he is wasting?
There are two portions of a day, daytime and nighttime.
What are the activities of nighttime?
A person will sleep at night.
Or he will do sex at night.
Two activities, no third activity.
And in daytime what he is supposed to do?
Rajan, the king, has been explained.
In daytime they will work hard, engage in activities for getting money, for getting economic resources.
For what?
Kutumbha means family, house.
Kutumbha means maintenance.
In order to maintain the family, they will work very hard in the daytime.
And just to sleep or enjoy sex at night.
This is the life of a materialist.
Now a person may tell what is wrong in this understanding.
After all this is life.
We have to work so that we can sleep or enjoy at night.
This is life and we die by this understanding.
But Bhagavatam tells no, this is completely lost understanding about life.
So although a person finds lot of meaning in such activities,
devotees or the self-realized people, they don't give any credit to such activities.
A person could be very very accomplished in material terms.
He could have worked very hard and cracked the best of the examinations with the best of ranks.
He could have done enormous research and produced many many papers.
Or he could have established a very big million dollar company running the business very very honestly.
Or he would have done lot of social service also.
He could have done great things for the nation or world or for the universe also.
But all these activities have not even a unit credit.
But all these activities are given.
So please don't become disappointed.
But this is fact.
All these activities are given zero credit.
Z E R O.
There is no credit.
Sir, you have done very nice job your entire life.
You have been very honest.
You have behaved very nicely, talked very politely.
You have worked hard.
You have not worked hard just for yourself, but your family and for nation and for the world or for the entire creation.
But all these activities are of no value.
Why no value?
No value in the perspective of Krishna and that of realized souls.
So Krishna is telling one who sees inaction in action.
So although there is a lot of action going on in this world, but a liberated soul will not see any action.
He will see no activities going on.
They are not doing anything.
And when a person can see that as long as a person thinks, no, they're also doing something, there is some value to their work.
No, sir, there is no value to the work.
No value, zero value to the material work.
So when a person knows that Krishna is telling here, we are not telling based on our own preconceived notions.
Krishna is telling he is in the transcendental position.
So that is why these Bhagavad Gita think when people would come on weekends to hear on Sunday feast to hear lectures.
Generally, we have weekend programs in all of our temples.
So Prabhupada told, please do not make it a weekend retreat kind of thing.
That OK, whole activity, whole week we have done some activities.
We are disturbed now.
Let me get some peace of mind, just like people go to resorts or some clubs to relax.
So don't make it weekend retreat or weekend enjoyment.
If you have to solve the problems of life, you have to not once in a week touch Krishna a bit, but you have to live in Krishna.
Live in Krishna consciousness.
So Bhagavatam says, Yadavagavisargo Janatagaviplavo.
So this is not an ordinary thing, just like people tell, oh, this is also important in life.
We have to, yes, whole day you work very nicely and then little bit you chant,
one round you chant, two rounds you chant, little you read Bhagavad Gita and that is sufficient.
In this way, you have a balance in life like that.
People want to understand and they perceive it like that.
But here Krishna is giving a totally different understanding and Bhagavatam tells,
Yadavagavisargo Janatagaviplavo.
These words of scriptures, especially Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavatam, Viplava.
Viplava means revolution.
They are meant to bring a revolution in the lives of the people.
So just see, this is revolutionary shloka.
So only such a person, Krishna is telling.
Now who is intelligent, who is unintelligent?
The most intelligent personality can tell.
Just like a child.
Child does not know. He thinks my daddy is strongest and my daddy is most wise.
But when he grows up, he understands, oh, my daddy doesn't know so many things and he's not strongest.
So who is strong, who is wise?
Only a mature person can tell.
So here Krishna is telling.
Only he is intelligent among men who sees inaction in action.
So a person who sees, although people are engaged in rigorous activity and the activities are increasing,
but there is no action.
He is in the transcendental.
Transcendental means beyond the laws of nature.
He is situated on a spiritual liberated transcendental position.
And although he also is engaged in all sorts of activities.
So how to understand this thing?
So for this, we have to understand there are three kinds of action as Krishna has described in the previous verse.
And that depends upon the consciousness of the person.
So people in the lowest consciousness, the activities which they do are the activities for sense enjoyment.
There are six senses in our body.
Five actions, five sense organs, that we have all read.
And which is the sixth sense, that is the mind.
Mind is also a sense.
Mind also needs pleasure.
Mind also has desires.
Mana shashthani indriyani prakriti sthani karshati.
And karshati, living entry, struggling in this world very hard just to satisfy the six senses.
So any person whose aim of life is to satisfy the senses.
What is our aim of life?
What we have been encouraged to do?
Oh, same thing.
Just to satisfy the senses.
For this we are working or we are doing whatever we do in life.
So Bhagavatam mentions very strong shloka again.
Noonam pramatta kurute vikarma yad indriya pritaye aapranoti.
So Bhagavatam is mentioning yad indriya pritaye, indri priti.
Indri means senses, priti means satisfaction.
So any person whose aim of life is to work for satisfaction of the senses, Bhagavatam mentions noonam.
Noonam means definitely, mattah means mad, pramatta means extremely mad.
He is extremely mad person.
Any person who is working to satisfy the senses, which we are all doing without any exception.
Either we could be working hard to satisfy our senses or to satisfy the senses of people who are dependent or related or may not be related to us.
My sense satisfaction or sense satisfaction of other people.
If that is the objective of life then Krishna is defining noonam pramatta.
Definitely without any doubt pramatta, these are the activities of a mad man.
Oh mad man.
But he has cracked all the best exams.
He has studied in the best of the colleges of the country.
He is working in the best of the companies.
But God is telling, if the aim of all this work is enjoyment of senses which include the mind,
sensual satisfaction or mental satisfaction you want in life, then this is noonam definitely pramatta.
Then this is mad activity.
And kurute vikarma, the actions done by that person, they are called vikarma.
He will definitely do vikarma.
Vikarma means actions which are not prescribed as per the Vedas.
And why it is called mad man?
Very simple.
Although people after so much of education are not able to understand,
but any person who just touches Bhagavad Gita in proper parampara will be able to understand.
Ultimately why we are working so hard to satisfy the senses?
Because the demand of the senses makes us uncomfortable.
If your senses are demanding a big car, one crore car, one crore worth,
then there is tension in the body and then you want to have it.
But if the senses do not demand, then you are not disturbed.
So ultimately your senses are not peaceful.
Senses are demanding and we work so that they can become peaceful.
But the process of sense gratification is so abnormal.
Rather than being pacified and satisfied, the senses start desiring even more.
So you wanted to pacify the senses, but the senses have become more agitated
and they keep on getting more and more agitated.
So that is why such an activity does not make any sense.
That is why Krishna is telling noonam definitely pramatta,
these activities should be considered activities of a mad man.
Noonam pramatta kurute vikarma.
The simple thing they don't understand,
that enjoyment of the senses leads to perpetual dissatisfaction.
You always want more.
You smoke one cigarette, then two cigarettes, three, four, five, ten, a pack of cigarettes.
Same how you want, but you are not getting that.
You want even more.
Without any limit, the body tells increase, increase, increase.
So that is why this is called pramatta, mad activities.
And because there is no satisfaction,
a person cannot just stick to the right course of action.
He will do vikarma.
If the aim in life is just to satisfy the senses, he is living for that vikarma.
He will break the laws of nature.
So all those people who are living in extreme low consciousness,
I am this body only, there is no next life,
then they end up doing vikarma, breaking the laws of nature.
There is lot of suffering in life.
So, Prabhu, why do you tell hard work is bad?
We should not work hard.
Yes, this is another wrong conception.
That hard work is going to bring me happiness.
Suppose a person works very, very hard to do a bank robbery.
Will he be able to happily enjoy that money?
No.
So hard work should be done following the laws.
You work very hard in serving the government,
then it is the right course of action.
You may get material rewards.
But if you work very hard against the laws established by the government,
then there is going to be endless misery in our life.
So it is so simple to understand.
How can hard work bring you happiness?
Hard work should be in the right direction.
Then it will bring you happiness.
Now people are working very hard just to satisfy the senses,
and thus they are doing vikarma, breaking the laws of nature.
They want to accumulate wealth and think wealth will make them happy.
They do not understand it is the law of nature.
Accumulation of wealth will send you to hell.
Just like hoarding, black marketing, hoarding you cannot do.
Hoarding is a crime.
So Krishna has created wealth, all the resources,
so that they can be equitably distributed among his all sons.
All the species are sons of God.
But if somebody hoards them, does not utilize them as per the laws of nature,
then simply by accumulation of money, a person will be sent to hell.
So like these people are not aware and they keep on doing vikarma.
So these are the activities of lowest consciousness, breaking the laws of nature.
So in this kind of activity, majority of the population is engaged today.
Some exceptions could be there, but almost all of us,
materially we could be considered very wise, but we are doing vikarma.
Now when we advance further, we get little sanity than a person does karma.
What is karma?
Karma means the activities which are in accordance with the Vedic injunctions.
So Krishna does not tell you, you want to enjoy, let me give you punishment.
How can you enjoy without?
No.
So Krishna has told yes, because everyone wants to enjoy here.
So this is the proper understanding everywhere.
I see in Mumbai, the culture is so nice.
You want to get into bus, people would stand in a line and do this thing.
Support, they start.
Why do they stand in line?
They can rush like anything.
If they do like that, it will be kiosks for everyone.
So that's for mutual benefit.
Some laws are there.
The traffic signal is there for mutual benefit.
We are fine for not wearing helmet for our benefit.
So for our benefit, for everyone's benefit, Krishna has enacted some laws here.
So you want to enjoy here.
OK, you go, you please enjoy.
But then you have to do certain duties also when you are going there.
So which are those duties or duties very hard?
If it is very hard, you can choose your level and do simple duties.
Not everyone is supposed to work very hard and acquire a top bureaucratic position in the government.
There are simple jobs also.
You cannot work so hard.
Take this other job, simple job.
So in this way, the society for the proper management so that people can be very, very peaceful.
The society has been divided into varnas and ashramas, social and spiritual divisions.
Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra.
These are social divisions.
Brahmachari, Garhasta, Vana, Prastha, Sannyas.
These are spiritual divisions because we are combination of matter and spirit.
So it is important to address the demands of body and most importantly, the demands of soul as well.
So this varnasrama system takes care of demands of the body and that of spirit soul also.
Which is the most important factor.
So you decide.
So there are proper activities for every segment.
For students, Brahmacharya is very important.
They are called Brahmacharis.
For them, certain rules and regulations are there.
Simply working hard does not make a person a student.
That is vikarma.
Student has to follow certain rules and regulations.
It is defined over there.
That is why we will not praise a person who has worked very hard.
But he has not controlled his senses because he should control his senses.
Controlling senses is very, very important for Brahmachari.
If he does not control his senses, he gets knowledge.
He will create chaos in the society like it is happening today.
Most of the judiciary, most of the bureaucracy, most of the legislature.
Anyway, we know it is all corrupt.
Why? Because they have got knowledge.
They can quote wonderful complex words from the Oxford dictionary.
They can quote wonderful scientific formula.
They know so many other business dynamics.
But they have not been able to control the senses.
And thus, they have become corrupt.
So that is why before imparting knowledge, learn to control the senses.
So this is the duty of a student.
Otherwise, he will not be given any education.
Like this, duties are there for all the segments.
You cannot follow Brahmacharya.
You are unqualified. No problem.
At least follow Garhastasram. That is minimum.
Shudra is not supposed to be Brahmachari.
Very tough for him.
At least become a Garhasta. This is important.
Need not become Vanaprastha. Need not go to jungle also.
But Garhasta minimum thing is important for you.
And the more you advance, just like in material world, the higher position you want,
the more you have to work hard in a similar fashion.
The more you want to advance towards happiness,
then the more rules and regulations a person has to pick up.
And Brahmana means so many rules and regulations.
He has to follow everything.
He has to follow Brahmacharya.
Then in between these two are optionals.
But then sannyasi has to follow.
Sannyas rules are very very strict.
And so many other rules and regulations.
Take bath three times in a day.
Change your clothes.
And engage in rigorous study.
And so many hardships are there.
You have to walk on foot.
And you cannot sleep under same tree every day.
You have to change place.
And so many other things are there.
You cannot cook very nice food for yourself.
You have to go beg little food.
And all these hardships are there.
If you cannot do that, choose some other thing.
But define yourself.
How you wish to fit yourself.
Just like going to college is important.
Going to school is important.
Now you can choose which subjects you want to study.
So in a similar fashion, freedom is given to us.
You cannot follow the rules and regulations of Brahmana.
Okay, follow of Kshatriya.
You are not so much advanced to follow rules of Kshatriya also.
Okay, you become, take the rules of Vaishya.
You cannot do that also.
Then you take the rules of Shudra at least.
And you cannot do that.
Then you are Chandal.
And Abhira, Shumbha, Yavana, Khasa, other races are there.
But if you don't follow in this Varnashrama system,
you cannot become happy and satisfied in life.
Then other, they are classified.
If you want to become happiness,
just like if anybody wants to make his living, have some money,
he has to take up education, do some job, business,
and do some endeavor.
In a similar fashion, if you want to become happy in life,
a person has to follow this management system,
which is set up by God, which is called Varnashrama system.
So those people who follow the right activities,
either for Brahmachari, Grasta, Vaanaprastha, Sannyas,
or Brahman, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra,
those activities are called Karma.
Karma means the activities as mentioned in the Vedas.
So when you do such kind of activities,
then you can fulfill your desires of enjoyment,
and you will not suffer unduly in so many complications and risks
that we have in this world.
And slowly, if we keep on doing those Karmas,
after many, many lies, we'll keep on advancing,
and we'll come to the understanding that I am not the body.
And then we will advance towards spiritual life.
So we had some desire of enjoying this body,
that also will be fulfilled, and gradually there would be upliftment.
This is called Pravritti Mara.
Pravritti means tendency.
We all have tendency of sense enjoyment,
so the Vedas recommend the process.
You do the activities following the systems of Varnashrama,
and you will be able to satisfy your senses,
and then you will advance towards your eternal happiness,
spiritual understanding also.
So the people of the lowest consciousness, they do Vikarma.
They don't understand at all.
And those who are more advanced, they do Karma.
Karma means they want to enjoy this world following the activities of the scriptures.
And ultimately, how they are able to enjoy?
Because all the activities of Varnashrama system are meant for satisfaction of Krishna.
So the Vedas tell what is the purpose of this Varnashrama.
Varnashramacharvata purushena para pumaan
vishnur aradhyate pantha nanyat tattosha karanam
Tosha means satisfaction, karanam.
The satisfaction of Vishnu is the aim of this Varnashrama system.
So yes, the people may not be willing to exclusively satisfy God,
but these people are advanced because they know
without satisfying God I cannot be satisfied.
Just like when a person does government job,
he's not dying to serve the government.
He wants name, fame, money for himself, but he knows
only when I get a government job, I'll be able to enjoy all these comforts
which a top person, bureaucrats or a minister may get.
So I have to serve government if I want these comforts.
In this way, a knowledgeable person, not perfectly knowledgeable,
but little knowledgeable person understands
I have to satisfy Krishna, Vishnu, I have to follow Varnashrama.
Although that may not be my heart's desire,
but without satisfying God, I cannot satisfy myself.
I am part and parcel of God.
So that is why people engage in Varnashrama system
in indirect satisfaction of Vishnu.
And when a person becomes more advanced, then what happens to him?
Karmani akarmaya pashet
Then he starts seeing inaction in action.
Then he understands the knowledge of the Vedanta
What is the use of all these activities?
The karma will give bad reaction, karma may give good reaction,
but this good and bad, these are all mental concoctions.
These are illusions.
If I eat halwa, I think it is very good.
And if stool is being fed to a man, he will tell it is very bad, it is nasty.
But what is this good and nasty?
The same stool is very tasty for a pig's body.
So all this effect, good and bad, that I'm feeling it is simply because of body.
In man's body, one may desire a woman.
In woman's body, one may desire a man.
So it is illusion.
I am satisfying not myself, but the body.
I am thinking I am this body.
Helplessly I am being repelled by some things
and attracted towards few things.
Both are illusions brought about by accepting a body.
I am not this body.
So,
This is all illusion.
This is good, this is bad.
Just like in dream.
Oh, I think, oh, it is very nice.
I have become very rich.
I have become king.
Or in dream, I think I have become pauper.
Both are useless.
In a similar fashion, we are eternal.
Now this plaything is going on.
Just like we play computer games at times.
And we can make huge kingdom in computer game.
We can build lot of army and wealth in computer game.
But a person who is in knowledge, he will tell father will come and slap the child.
Why you are wasting your time?
Entirely you are playing computer game.
Because he sees action in inaction.
He sees inaction in action.
So although he is doing lot of activity,
but all that activity is waste.
Because in real life, he is not making any advancement.
He is playing very nice soccer on the computer.
But unless he goes and plays, does some physical activity here,
he will spoil his health.
It is not going to benefit him.
He has made lot of money online in some computer game.
But real world he has to make money.
So all the activities on virtual platform have no value.
It is time pass.
In a similar fashion, an enlightened soul intelligent among men.
He knows that all the activities of this world are simply like playthings.
I am eternal spirit soul.
So any kind of activity that you do that is temporary,
you will move on, you will carry on.
So what is the use of any kind of benefit?
Some relief, temporary relief to the sensor you will be able to give.
But that is not sufficient.
The sufficient action is you should not come again in this temporary platform.
Because you cannot stop miseries.
Even if you do karma very very nicely,
you go to very nice country,
you take birth in a very good rich family.
But then when rich person is affected by COVID, pain would be less.
The COVID, what do we call it, virus.
Will it discriminate that oh this is rich man,
let me not give much misery to him.
Let me bring little infection.
No, the misery would be same.
So rich man will be suffering maybe in a good house
and a poor man may be suffering in a small house.
But this big house does not give us any special benefit.
You move into a big house,
maybe you will feel satisfaction for a month or two or for a week or two,
then it is the same thing.
So thus it is all illusion, good and bad.
The miseries remain the same.
A rich man has a breakup or a poor man has a breakup.
After breakup, the heart is broken and the suffering is equal.
A rich man dies, he also gets old.
Old age affects equally a poor man also.
It does not make any difference.
So thus a wise man does not give any credit to the activities on material platform.
And only when we are totally convinced,
if I don't do activities of Krishna consciousness,
these activities have some value then we are living in illusion.
So this action is, this shloka is very very important.
Please understand.
If we want to call ourselves intelligent,
we have to give zero value to any material activity.
So thus a person who is wise,
he understands all these activities are temporary and full of misery.
So that is why I should not do karma.
I should not do vikarma also.
Good or bad, ultimately birth, death, old age and disease.
These are the real miseries.
They will always continue with me.
So let me not do akarma.
Let me not do vikarma.
Let me not follow the laws of nature,
not break the laws of nature,
but let me do akarma.
What is akarma?
Akarma means inaction.
Any action which is not bringing a reaction.
So although engaged in all sorts of activities,
such an intelligent man, he understands.
Krishna is a controller for all the laws of nature.
So if I do some activity for Krishna,
I will also, Krishna is guaranteeing,
you will also not be controlled by the laws of nature.
So when a person does activities only for the satisfaction of Krishna,
because his desire was not involved,
so that we will see in the next class,
what is the consciousness of a person who does perfect actions.
So such a person only desires the satisfaction of Krishna
and that activity does not bring any material reaction.
So such a person, because he has no material desire in life,
he is satisfying Krishna and thus he is satisfied.
And thus there is no more material desire.
When there is no material desire,
the laws of nature will not give us any material body.
Thus death, old age, disease, everything is stopped once and for all.
So this is real technology.
We need not invent some cosmetics to keep us young.
The soul is always young.
We need not try to reverse the DNA codes to stop the aging process.
We need not invent all these.
Of course, as long as we are in the body,
we have to make some stop arrangement.
But ultimate endeavor should be that soul should not enter again
in this temporary miserable body.
So thus for this, we should transcend beyond the karma,
beyond vikarma and we should do a karma,
activities only for the satisfaction of Krishna.
And how does those activities begin?
So now this, anyway, even if you want to do karma, right action,
it is not possible in Kalyuga because all this varnashrama is finished.
There is no education.
People cannot be trained.
So the universal method is recommended for all.
Now the civilization is Shudra at best or less than Shudra,
not even following basic rules and regulations also.
So that's a common and very simple process recommended for all.
Simply by following this process,
a person can become most wise and he can understand things clearly,
become free from the laws of nature.
And what is that action?
Tan nam grahan adi bhi.
Yamaraj is telling.
Yamaraj means the judge, supreme judge.
So he's telling the topmost action is engagement.
Vasudeva Bhagavati, engagement in service of Krishna.
And that begins with tan nam grahan adi bhi,
chanting the names of Krishna.
So simply by chanting and hearing the names of Krishna,
service to Krishna begins and a person realizes the spiritual position
because free from all the activities,
so-called results of good and bad activities.
So it is very, very important science.
So now we will all try to practice this chanting.
And in the next session is also very important.
We will understand the consciousness of a person,
the intelligence of person which he acts,
which is very, very important.
