Just a quick recap because we are going to start a new chapter today.
So what have we studied in chapter 1, 2 and 3?
Chapter 1 indicates the setup of the armies
and it indicates the position of Arjuna who is representing a common worldly man, a materialist like us.
Although he is a pure devotee, but he is behaving like a materialist so that all the materialists, all of us can be helped by this knowledge.
So what is the situation of Arjuna? He is a Kshatriya warrior. He is supposed to fight for righteousness.
He should not mind whether other party is related to me, unrelated to me, my friend or enemy,
but he is supposed to kill the non-righteous people, his enemies on the other side.
But here Arjuna is perplexed. Why?
So we all fight many wars, but if somebody tells us now you have to fight with your sons, wife, cousins, parents,
then it is a very difficult situation.
So Arjuna was faced with such a situation where he has to fight and kill his own relatives.
So he was very much perplexed.
So Lord Krishna very beautifully explained to Arjuna, second chapter onwards,
what is the cause of all the perplexities for Arjuna and for all of us, the embodied living entities on this planet?
We are thinking let me improve technology, let me make it 5G, 6G or 10G, eventually I will be happy.
Let me have some food, some material comforts, I would be happy.
There is some problem, some COVID, let us have some vaccine and we will be happy.
The earth planet is having some problems, let us go to another planet and we will be happy.
I am having less money, let me have more money, I will be happy.
I am having some disease, my relatives are having disease or general people or animals are suffering.
If I can help them recover from their disease, they will be happy.
People are having stress, let us start some laughter club and make them laugh and that would make them happy.
So Shrimad Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavatam, all the literature rejects all such theories,
tells it is totally completely bogus and only ignorant people can pursue and put faith in such things.
So Bhagavad Gita and all the Vedas and all the bona fide religions practically,
we sometimes go into the differences without seeing the common thread, the common understanding.
All the bona fide religions, spiritual authorities, they establish the same fact and what is the fact?
So it is mentioned,
So the Vedic science has explained this body has developed from three basic elements called dhatu.
Dhatu means the root or the basic substance.
So three elements mix together, kaaf, pitta and vaat and develop this body.
So if any person thinks I am this bag of chemicals and the connections which are based on this bag of chemicals,
this body, they are mine.
So we have some connections with people around us. What are those connections?
They are based upon body.
And this body has some connection with a land where this bag of chemical has taken birth.
We think that land is worshipable, which is called nationalism.
So Shrimad Bhagavatam does not support all these features, all these facts.
So these are, this is the biggest ignorance which is causing all the trouble in our life.
And what is the trouble?
Thinking that I am this bag of chemicals, I am this body.
And when I think I am this bag of chemicals,
then I am very much scared when there is any disturbance in this chemical bag.
So this bag of chemicals follows the laws of nature.
This bag will get old, will get diseased, some misery, wound, accident can happen and then we would feel the pain.
Just like we identify ourselves with a body in dream and we feel pain and pleasures associated with that body, which is but hallucination.
Similarly, Lord Krishna told to Arjuna in second chapter,
this is the first understanding you get that you are different from this bag of chemicals.
So if at all a person is able to realize I am completely different from this body and bodily connections do not belong to me, they are related to this body.
As soon as body is gone, all the connections are also gone.
So if a person maintains such a consciousness, getting a human birth, he does not advance in the knowledge I am completely different from this body.
Let me wake up.
All the Vedas, till now you can wake up.
When a person wakes up, he is able to solve all the problems of dream immediately.
So that is why the Vedas urge us.
This path of awakening is like walking on razor's edge.
A person should be very, very careful.
One fall down, Srila Prabhupada explains, and there is gap of millions of years.
Millions of years a person, because we don't know when we will get next this human body.
If you fail on the time of exam, you may be very educated, very learned.
But somehow or other, if you are not able to perform at the time of exam, you flunk.
You have to repeat the entire year again.
Similarly, if you flunk now, we don't utilize this human body to realize practically I am completely different from this body.
Then body has to undergo changes of old age, disease, death, separation and so many other physical and mental agonies.
So then we have wasted this human form of life.
So Vedas are just that although it is anityam, it is temporary, but artha dam, this body is very, very valuable.
In this body, you can wake up to your original identity.
So do not waste this. Do not waste a single moment in forgetfulness of God.
Do not waste your valuable time earning some temporary money, which is not going to solve any problem.
But simply a hope that my greed will be satisfied by this thing.
The whole world, without any exception, is greedy, just amassing more and more wealth, more and more comforts and creating problems.
Today I was reading the result is out of IIT JEE this year.
With much delay it happened, the mains examination.
And one of the boy who has scored the top rank, he's telling how he has prepared last four years for this examination.
So it is very, very shocking that four years a person has spent in something which is temporary.
Four valuable years. If that much effort you would have put in spiritual life, you would have attained self-realization probably.
But all that effort wasted.
So earlier people were putting one year.
Now it is it became two years. Now it is four years.
Then his descendants in couple of years, they would tell I prepared six years for that.
This is how a person when he does not understand that he is different from this body, he spoils and increases his suffering in this life.
So Lord Krishna gave this teaching to Arjuna and all the bona fide religion.
They are common till this basic understanding.
Now how much a person can understand grass further knowledge here, different spiritual paths, different religions, they differ.
Some of them are again not bona fide at all, but those which are bona fide, they differ.
If a person is qualified only to understand this level, they would speak that much knowledge only.
If somebody is more qualified, then more knowledge would be revealed to that person.
So Lord Krishna told this to Arjuna.
First of all, understand all the problems can be solved simply by realizing that you are different from body.
All the material problems finished. That's it.
There is no need to waste time in temporary patchwork.
You do the patchwork, you come again in other body and suffer again.
So all the material problems are finished as soon as I am Brahmasmi, I am spirit soul, this is realized.
And then if you can realize what is the source of the spirit soul?
What is the origin of so many spirits which are residing in different different bodies?
And what is the origin of all these bodies?
And who has defined these laws which relate the living entity to this body and other bodies?
So when a person is able to realize that relationship of self, ourself with the super self with God
and engages himself in loving service of God, then he establishes himself in positive happiness of life.
Coming out of misery is possible simply by understanding I am not the body.
Now if you want pleasure, positive pleasure, you have to understand what is your relation with God
and engage in loving service of God.
So how to understand, realize this position, it is very very difficult.
How much ever a person may apply his mind intelligence just like a sleeping person, he cannot wake up.
So in order to wake a living entity up, different processes are prescribed.
The first basic principle Lord Krishna recommended after summarizing this entire knowledge in second chapter.
In third chapter Lord Krishna recommended as we have seen thoroughly in detail the process of Karma Yoga.
We all want to do certain activity for enjoyment of our senses.
And the living entity is very hard to convince the living entity that please
do not think by working for your sensual enjoyment you will not be happy.
So work is encouraged. Okay you work.
And the result of work you start engaging in the service of God.
This is called Karma Yoga.
Offer the results for God. You work, you also want to enjoy, it's okay.
But result some portion you start offering to God.
And then when a person starts offering like this, then he rises to the platform of knowledge.
He rises to the platform of Gyan Yoga, transcendental knowledge.
And this Gyan Yoga, transcendental knowledge is explained by Lord Krishna now in the fourth chapter.
So let us see these beautiful few verses of fourth chapter now.
So here you see on the screen chapter four, transcendental knowledge.
Text number one.
Translation.
So now Lord Krishna is narrating the history of Bhagavad Gita.
It is not that Arjuna first time I am speaking this knowledge to you.
People ask question that Bhagavad Gita maybe it was applicable 5000 years ago.
But in today's setup we need something else.
So Lord Krishna is telling no, please do not mistake in that fashion.
The same knowledge I instructed to Vivasvan, Sun God.
The life is there on every planet and also in Sun planet.
Why scientists are in doubt because they do not understand what is life.
We think life is combination of matter, matter as we see now.
How this matter can exist in Sun?
No, life is because of spirit which is present now in this material body.
There are bodies which are suitable for this planet.
But there are some suitable bodies in water like that of fishes.
Similarly there are suitable bodies which live in fire also.
And science now has discovered there are bacteria in fire as well.
So life is there on Sun planet also.
And the ruler of that planet, his name is Vivasvan.
The rulers change just like the kings change, the presidents change of the country.
But the current ruler, his name is Vivasvan.
And their lifespan is also very very huge as compared to the human beings.
So Lord Krishna is telling this imperishable science of yoga avyayam.
The material knowledge that we study is perishable.
Again you take birth, again you have to study.
But spiritual knowledge if you cultivate whatever Bhagavad Gita you have understood.
Congratulations to all of you. That is never going to be taken away from you.
That knowledge is there with us.
Now how much we want to advance, that depends upon us.
If you are not able to finish this process in this life, next life again we will continue from that level.
If you want to continue, freedom is always given to us.
But this is imperishable avyayam. It is never destroyed.
So this imperishable science of yoga, Lord Krishna spoke to Vivasvan.
Vivasvan spoke it to Manu, father of mankind.
That is why we are called Manav.
Manu, the descendants of Manu are called Manav.
Just like Kuru, from Kuru came Kaurava.
From Pandu, Pandava. From Manu, Manava.
So that is why we are called Manav. We have come from Manu.
And Manu instructed this to his son Ikshavaku who became the next ruler.
The supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic succession.
And saintly kings understood it in that way.
But in course of time the succession was broken and therefore the science as it is appears to be lost.
So just like Srila Prabhupada explains any medicine you take,
on the label the instructions are given.
One or two teaspoons before meals in the morning, in the evening.
So directions are given on the label itself.
Similarly, Bhagavad Gita itself tells how to receive this knowledge properly.
So this is the way of receiving knowledge.
Lord Krishna is beautifully describing in the fourth chapter.
If we understand this correctly, all of our doubts will be solved.
So Lord Krishna mentions how this knowledge has to be received.
Simply anybody can pick up Bhagavad Gita and read it. No.
So in this parampara the knowledge has to be passed down.
I speak, I am the creator of the entire world, the universe.
So this is perfect knowledge because creator knows the perfect knowledge about creation.
Lord Krishna passed down by his perfect intelligence.
He found out the person who can understand it nicely and pass it on without any change.
And he told, now you are authorized to pass it down.
So Vivasvan again being authorized by Krishna, chosen by Krishna.
He can also understand because he is chosen by God himself.
Who is the next capable personality who can pass this knowledge without any change?
Then he chose Ikshavaku.
And in this way this knowledge was coming down in the chain of Rajrishis.
This knowledge is specially meant for the influential people of the society and the rulers.
Because it is a ruler's responsibility to help people come out of the problems of life.
People in general are less intelligent.
The way propaganda happens people follow very very blindly.
The intelligence to question the status quo is very very less.
So that is why the leaders should be given this knowledge first of all.
So this knowledge was spoken to the Rajrishis.
They were saintly kings, they were saints, rishis.
But they were holding the position of king in order to make the entire civilization saintly.
So such a saintly king, not like today we see all around most of the people, some good people are also there.
But most of them are not of good character.
So such kind of people, how they can be happy, they can make others happy.
So a saintly person should be sitting on the throne.
And to such people this Bhagavad Gita was spoken.
So if it was coming now in this parampara, what is the need of Krishna speaking this knowledge again?
So Krishna tells,
Mahata means very, this very great powerful time.
Kala means time, time factor destroys everything.
Nothing can sustain the powerful influence of time.
So this knowledge of yoga.
Yoga means to connect, the knowledge of connecting soul with the super soul, with God.
This knowledge got lost by the powerful influence of time.
How the knowledge gets lost?
If it is not instructed to some other person.
Or some upstart, he is not authorized by his guru.
Suppose Maharaj Ikshwaku did not tell anybody, now you speak this knowledge further and he starts speaking.
He is not perfect, but he starts explaining to others.
Then the knowledge starts getting distorted.
So unless somebody is authorized by his guru, now you are perfect.
You can pass on this knowledge.
You are next guru.
A person should not become a guru.
So when some people without getting authorization from their spiritual master, they become gurus.
This dharma seglani happens.
The knowledge gets lost.
So in this way, for certain reasons, either the knowledge was not passed down.
No qualified person was found.
It got lost.
Or some people took the other meaning.
So this knowledge got lost.
In course of time, the succession was broken.
And therefore, the science as it is appears to be lost, Krishna is telling.
So Bhagavad Gita was present at that time also.
But as it is knowledge, it was not there.
What is the meaning of as it is?
As it is means Krishna has a purpose in mind, the actual meaning.
If you pick up these shlokas, even a word, it carries many, many meanings.
And contradictory meanings.
Niyamagraha is a word in Sanskrit.
Now Niyamagraha means following the rules and regulations very, very strictly and not following them at all.
Both meanings which are completely contradictory, they are explained by the word Niyamagraha.
Now what will a person understand?
Which is the right meaning?
The word Atma means senses also.
It means mind also.
It means body also.
It means intelligence also.
It means soul also.
It means super soul, God also.
Atma has all these meanings.
So how a person can figure out?
Good means quality.
Good means rope also.
So many meanings.
And Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was debating.
He explained many, many meanings.
I don't remember how many.
I don't remember how many.
Some 50-60 odd meanings he explained of one verse, one shloka, Atmaram shloka.
So how can we understand as it is meaning?
Krishna is willing to convey some meaning, not that I can understand in my own way.
So in order to have that as it is meaning, we have to get this knowledge in parampara.
The speaker Lord Krishna, he has certain intent behind that speech, behind these words.
He chooses among his disciples.
So this person is perfect to get knowledge.
And then that person chooses another disciple.
In this way, this knowledge should be taken.
So the science as it is appears to be lost.
Bhagavad Gita was present, but the original knowledge is lost.
So in order to get perfect knowledge, as we discussed now,
all the problems are because of one's forgetfulness of reality, real identity.
Simply thinking I am this body and I have some connections
and there is turmoil in some connections or the body and mind and the person is disturbed.
So how to have the real knowledge?
There are two ways of it.
We discussed this in Jigyasa also.
And these were the foundation.
These are the founding shlokas on which that session was based.
So one way of getting knowledge is doing research as people are doing now.
Now that is you may wonder because research is done by very intelligent people.
But actually, if you see in an unbiased manner,
doing research is the most ignorant way of getting knowledge.
Most ignorant way of getting knowledge is doing research about something.
And only a person who is completely bewildered and he does not have any sense in life
can waste his time in research to get knowledge.
Who does not have any sense, who does not even have basic common sense,
will waste his time in research work.
Oh, Prabhu, why you are telling like that?
The most intelligent people, they are doing research.
So that is why we have not come across the real intelligence.
So this was the session when I heard in my college days and it was very, very striking.
And I was also confused and was trying to figure out what is the right process, right path.
And when I understood this knowledge, I was like, oh my God, this is so, this is so true.
So the Vedas mentions, Sri Chaitanya Charita Amrita mentions, how do we do research work?
We do it using this mind-body system that we have got.
But all these systems, they suffer from four defects, four mistakes.
Which are those four defects?
The first defect is we commit mistakes.
Karna part of Brahm, Pramad and Vipralipsa.
So Brahm, we all always come under some confusion, some bewilderment and we commit mistakes.
We commit mistakes almost every day in our life.
We commit calculation mistakes in mathematics and we score less marks.
We do various mistakes in choosing our jobs and we repent, I could not come to the right place.
We choose wrong people around us.
We choose wrong bosses, wrong subordinates, wrong life partners.
And then we think, oh, I've committed mistake.
So in this we commit a lot many mistakes.
So all of you who are married, you must be realizing.
Before marriage, we are thoroughly convinced, oh, my life is going to be blissful if I have this person.
But the end result is something different.
Why? That is the nature of this body.
That infatuation, when the sense desire is very, very strong, person becomes blind.
The mind does not work.
So that is why any person who is completely free from all the infatuations of the various senses,
he is only qualified to perceive, process and explain knowledge.
So thus we all commit mistakes.
It is very, very normal, natural for us.
The Nobel laureates pull their paper back.
Oh, there is some mistake in the paper.
And the theories keep on changing. The big, big scientists, they commit mistakes.
The greatest scientists, Albert Einstein, Stephen Hawking and all others have committed numerous mistakes
and so many wrong understandings they have, which they corrected later.
And some of them are even they have gone and now they are getting corrected.
So committing mistake to air is human.
So when it is common sense, when committing mistake is natural to us,
I would have committed some mistake in my understanding, in my research work.
So how I can be very, very sure and I can present the result that this is right and this is wrong and I can debate.
Yes, you can try to find out, but you can never debate basis.
The result of your research work, because there could be some mistake in that work.
So is it not sufficient? It is so simple.
It is commonest of the common sense because I'm having a defect called Bram.
I am bound to commit mistakes.
How can I debate and give talks that God does not exist?
Soul does not exist. You are this body.
How you can debate, sir, there could be mistake in your calculation, in your understanding.
And the simple thing does not strike you that we all commit mistakes as that person.
Have you ever committed mistake in life? He will tell yes.
Ask him, is it possible now also you might you must be committing some mistake.
He has to say, yes, nobody can be sure.
So that is why nobody can profess having perfect knowledge.
Who is doing research work because there could be some mistake.
And this is just one defect. There are more defects.
What is another defect that is called Pramad?
What is Pramad? Pramad means we come under illusion.
We mistake in the desert.
Sand for water or gas for water.
There is only gas over there and some reflection is happening because of that.
And we think there is water over there.
So we are mistaking gas as water.
This called Mirage.
Similarly, there are so many illusions around us.
Illusion, as we just discussed, when we dream, we think I am the body and sometimes the heart is palpitating and we are running.
We are worried and we wake up.
So we come under illusion when we are sleeping.
We come under influence of various intoxicants.
And the disciples would give example.
When there was a Rath Yatra in the West and devotees were distributing some sweet candy as prasadam.
Somehow somebody mixed some drugs in that.
And some devotees took that.
And then the devotee, they are explaining.
Samatha Ji, she was explaining that we are riding in a car and we suddenly notice that the roof has vanished of the car.
And we can see the sky over the top.
And suddenly I see my car is going, rising high into the sky.
It is flying into the sky.
So all these experiences you have when you are on drugs.
So we get influenced.
This called Pramads.
Similarly, the world is also perceived differently by different people.
The person who is tamasic, he will find faults everywhere.
He'll feel the whole world is bad.
This is bad.
This is bad.
The person is mad.
My life is bad.
Entire system is bad.
And thus he wants to leave this world.
Such a person commits suicide.
A satvik person, he is very happy.
Devotee.
For a devotee, entire world is full of happiness.
A pure devotee is not able to see fault anywhere.
He thinks I am the most faulty person.
Everyone is good.
So this is the vision of pure devotee.
He is not able to find any bad person on the planet.
And a tamasic person will not find any good person on the planet.
So it all depends upon the energies which are influencing us.
The way we perceive this world.
A colorblind person may see one color as something else.
A sick person may tell a different taste of food.
He may tell all food is bitter.
So how we come under illusion?
So how you can be so sure, sir, you could be under illusion.
What you are perceiving is not reality.
Dream is biggest illusion.
Similarly, Vedas till now also we are in illusion, in hallucination, thinking that I am this body.
So how you can be sure we could be under illusion?
So this is another defect.
First we commit mistakes and then there is illusion.
And after that, our senses are imperfect.
Karna part of.
Our eyes can see very small band of electromagnetic spectrum.
With your four hundred to how much it is seven hundred nine hundred nanometers.
That's it.
We can hear very limited ten to ten thousand decibels.
More beyond that, we cannot hear.
So our senses also can perceive very, very limited knowledge.
So all the nations are now busy in making very nice fighters, stealth jets.
Stealth means the radars won't be able to detect it.
So if some person tells, so I've got very nice radar, sir, there is no plane over us.
So should the person be very happy and satisfied?
No, some stealth bomber could be there.
It will come and bomb you.
Your radar is not able to detect it.
Similarly, our senses might not be able to detect other living entities.
We cannot tell there is no living entity on the planet.
You're not able to see and hear.
That is a different case.
So because our senses are limited.
So these are the three defects and then four defect is the prolapse are cheating tendency.
We all have tendency to cheat ourselves and others also.
Every morning we cheat ourselves.
Yes, I'll get up in five minutes news and then we understand every day.
I've been cheating myself for the last many months or years.
I've been snoozing and getting cheated.
Still, I cheat myself again.
So in this we have tendency of cheating ourselves and obviously cheating others also the whole.
So that is why we cannot depend upon knowledge taken from any human being
because the person could be cheating who is giving us knowledge or and everyone is cheating factually
because you do not have knowledge, but you are explaining this knowledge to others.
The social media is typical example of cheating.
People are stressed.
And I came across some profile somebody shared and the person is looking very happy.
And after two days, I got to know that she commits she committed suicide.
So on Facebook, they are looking very, very happy.
But then we don't know what is happening on their life in their life.
So we cheat others.
We cheat ourselves also for various reasons.
We cheat ourselves.
We cheat others.
We cheat ourselves.
So we cheat others.
We cheat ourselves also for various reasons.
We all know cheating exists.
So that's a human being.
We can never depend upon him or her for perfect knowledge because these are the four defects.
The person can cheat if he's not cheating or she's not cheating.
They have limited senses.
They can never be sure.
I have perceived everything in this world.
Even what we are perceiving, we could be illusioned.
And even though nothing is there, we have mistake committing tendency.
So these are four defects.
Just see how Vedas are so beautiful.
And they tell some people, the aboriginals in jungle, they wrote these books and gave it to us.
Aboriginal can analyze the world like that.
Corona part of the aboriginal is thinking, what is the truth of this life?
So all this plot was given so that the Britishers could rule us because our education system inspires us to get knowledge.
Perfect knowledge and become independent.
So this is how the Vedas analyze very beautifully that we are all suffering from four defects.
It is very, very simple and clear.
So that is why if a person does not have this common sense, I commit mistakes.
I have limited senses.
I cannot be sure I could be an illusion.
He will waste his time in research work by his research.
He can only at best tell what he's perceiving.
What is reality?
What is reality?
He cannot tell.
And we are interested in reality.
So that is why Lord Krishna tells this is how this knowledge should be taken.
If research work was sufficient, Krishna would not have taken the pain to come to this material world and explain this knowledge.
There are a lot many things for God to do.
Why God has to come here and explain?
Because it is not possible without his help.
He personally has to come here to again establish the parampara.
So this is one way.
Now, what is the other way?
So as we understood, we are hopeless that any human being can give us perfect knowledge.
So only other hope is if somehow a person can tell.
If we are very fortunate, God can tell us, see, this is perfect knowledge and you are able to recognize that God is standing in front of me.
You can take that knowledge like Arjuna is receiving here or some person tells this knowledge I received from God.
It is perfect.
This is not the result of my research work, but it is coming down in parampara.
God spoke to his disciple, to his disciple.
In this way, this knowledge has come down.
Then we can lend ears and endeavor to understand that if somebody tells us this is the knowledge of my research, then we can never be sure of it.
So that is why the perfect way of receiving knowledge is receiving this knowledge in parampara.
God gave knowledge to his son, his son, his disciple, his disciple, his disciple like that.
So without any change, this knowledge should come down.
Now that we have to apply our intelligence that we have to find a chain where this knowledge does not change.
So how to find such a chain?
This is another question many people can claim.
Yes, I also come in parampara.
I have received this knowledge from Krishna like that.
So Vedas do not leave any confusion.
Vedas are meant to enlighten us perfectly.
And God has given us Vedas.
So there should be, there is nothing missing in the Vedas.
So Vedas very beautifully describe.
If we have to get the perfect meaning of the shloka that we see here, how can we get the perfect meaning?
So the name is given of these lines, lineages, these display successions.
It is mentioned in many, many Vedas, especially Srila Prabhupada is quoted from Padma Purana.
And we also found in Garg Samhita.
This very beautiful, very clearly it has been given the names of this principal spiritual master and the name of this lineage.
So it is told, Sampraday Vihinaya Mantrate Nishvala Mataha.
Sampraday means this parampara is also called Sampradaya.
Vihina, mantra, if you receive any mantra, any shloka without Sampradaya, Nishvala Mataha, it will not have any effect.
You keep on chanting.
You read one verse, Oh Dhruv Maharaj, Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya, he chanted.
Let me also chant and make my life perfect.
It will not happen because Dhruv Maharaj received this mantra from Narad Muni.
So spiritual knowledge cannot be snatched.
It has to be given by the Guru.
That is why Diksha Vidha Nena.
Diksha is very, very important.
During Diksha, the Guru gives us knowledge from the right ear.
That is a science of receiving the spiritual mantra.
And in this way, when the Guru is willing to give, he is very pleased.
The spiritual mantra is received by the disciple.
And then the mantra has effect in his life.
Spiritual knowledge is revealed and the disciple becomes enlightened in all knowledge and he becomes liberated.
So unless it is given, it is not possible to snatch this knowledge without taking shelter of a Guru.
That Krishna will explain to accept a Guru in 4th chapter, verse number 32 or 34.
We'll see that.
So if any mantra is not received in parampara, directly if you read some books, it is not going to be effective.
The Vedas are telling mantra te nishphala, nishphala mataha, nishphala smritaha.
The same shloka is mentioned repeated in the Vedas.
So which is a proper samprada?
How do I understand that?
Yes, this lineage is nice.
Let me receive knowledge from here.
So it is told.
The names of these schools are given.
Just like the accreditation body, it affiliates some colleges.
This college is authorised.
In a similar fashion, the Vedas authorise.
One school is called Brahma Sampradaya.
One is Sri Sampradaya, Rudra Sampradaya, Kumar Sampradaya.
The first disciple of Krishna is Lord Shiva.
Lord Shiva started a sampradaya, that is called Rudra Sampradaya.
Similarly, another first disciple of parallel lineage is Lord Brahma.
And that is called Brahma Sampradaya.
One lineage was started by Lakshmi, who became original disciple.
That is called Sri. She is called Sri Devi, Lakshmi Devi.
That became Sri Sampradaya.
And Kumar Sampradaya, the sons of Brahma, they also became direct recipients of knowledge from Krishna.
And they started fourth sampradaya, called Kumar Sampradaya.
So these four,
four Vaishnava Sampradayas, these are the only bona fide sampradaya for spreading this knowledge,
which are coming from Krishna, the original speaker of Bhagavad Gita, and of all the Vedas.
Krishna tells,
I am the creator of Vedanta. I am the perfect knower of all the Vedas.
So only these people who receive knowledge from Lord Krishna,
who belong to these four lineages, can be understood to be having perfect knowledge.
Now somebody can claim, yes, yes, I belong to that parampara.
Brahmaji was our original spiritual master.
So how can I put faith?
So in Kali Yuga, the prominent Acharyas have come in this sampradaya.
Which are those Acharyas?
Those names are also mentioned in the Padma Purana and other scriptures.
Which are those names?
Madhvacharya, Chaturmukha.
So Chaturmukha Brahma Sampradaya, Madhvacharya will be the prominent Acharya.
Madhvacharya came around some 800-900 years ago.
Similarly, Ramanuja Sri, Sri Chakra, he will come in Sri Sampradaya.
Sri Padaramanuja Acharya also came some 1000 years ago.
Similarly, Nimbarka Acharya came in Kumar Sampradaya.
And Vishnu Swami came in Rudra Sampradaya.
So these names of prominent Acharyas are mentioned.
And because these Acharyas have appeared in Kali Yuga around 1000 years ago,
so it can be very easily, 1000-2000 years ago, it can be easily traced.
We have books now.
Madhvacharya appointed next person.
So these people are authorized.
There is no doubt because Vedas are mentioning their names.
Extraordinary powerful persons.
Their birthplace, everything, their literatures, everything you'll find.
So Ramanuja Acharya, whom he accepted as next disciple and appointed him as Guru, it is mentioned.
Whom he next appointed as Guru, it is mentioned.
These are all records kept.
1000 years, not difficult to find the records.
It is there in the history.
So thus in this way, very easily we can trace which is the perfect parampara coming from God.
And thus we have to find the parampara and get the knowledge.
And for your kind understanding, we belong to Brahma Sampradaya.
Lord Brahma gave this knowledge to, he received knowledge from Krishna.
Then he passed it on to Narad Muni.
Narad Muni gave to Veda Vyas.
He gave to Madhvacharya.
Then in this way, the knowledge has come down to Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.
From Chaitanya Mahaprabhu to six Goswamis.
Bhakti Vinod Thakur, Bhaktisdhan Maharaj, Srila Prabhupada.
And from Srila Prabhupada, we have been receiving this knowledge now.
The exact count is also given.
Prabhupada is 32nd in the Brahma Sampradaya, this disciplic succession from Krishna.
So in this fashion, this knowledge should be understood.
So that makes it very, very clear.
Whenever we are approaching any person, we should ask humbly that, sir or ma'am,
can you please explain what is your succession?
From where this knowledge has come?
If they tell, no, no, my Guru is self-powerful.
There is no need for him to follow any parampara.
Then we should not receive knowledge.
How can I put faith?
Because every person suffers from four defects.
This knowledge could be wrong.
So only if somebody tells, yes, this knowledge is received from parampara.
That is why Lord Krishna, he does not need to accept Guru.
But when he comes, he also accepts Guru.
Krishna Balra went to Sandipani Muni to get this knowledge.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is God himself.
He accepted Ishwar Puri as spiritual master to understand, to explain,
establish this point that accepting Guru in parampara is very, very important
so that nobody can cheat in future that this person does not need any Guru.
He is self-Guru.
God himself is accepting Guru.
So thus we can humbly ask, sir, do you belong to these succession which come from God himself?
Then we can get this knowledge.
Then we can do further research work and understand,
try to research means understanding the knowledge which they have given,
not independent research.
Somebody has given us this perfect knowledge.
Now I have to do research in his books.
What is knowledge?
What is perfect knowledge to him?
Not directly.
There is one more thing to it.
So I have got the right parampara.
I have got the name of Acharya.
I have got the person that this is perfect.
Now by reading, will I understand this knowledge?
No.
There is more qualification required.
So Krishna has perfect knowledge.
Krishna would have spoken this knowledge to anybody.
So why this knowledge was spoken specifically to Arjuna?
That qualification Krishna mentions in the next verse.
What is the verse?
Krishna mentions.
That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is today told by me to you
because you are my devotee as well as my friend.
Therefore, you can understand the transcendental mystery of this science.
So here Krishna mentions.
Because Bhakta, you are my devotee.
Therefore, rahasyam means secret.
So the spiritual knowledge remains a secret for a non-devotee.
If somebody is telling you I am following the process of jnana,
I am following the process of karma,
I am following the process xyz.
So those people are unqualified.
Only a person who follows the process of bhakti is qualified to get perfect knowledge.
Why Bhagavad Gita itself mentions,
Lord Krishna mentions here.
You can understand this rahasya,
this great mystery because you are bhakta, you are my devotee.
So any person who is not bhakta,
and this is not just one shloka,
if you read Bhagavad Gita,
you will find everywhere Lord Krishna is telling.
Only a devotee can know this knowledge.
So many shlokas, bhakta, bhakta, bhakta.
Other processes are meant to take a person to the level of being a devotee of God.
It is common sense.
When I understand by karma,
I get some sanity, I follow jnana,
then I understand I am not this body,
then I start doing dhyana on the super soul in the heart,
and then I realize that I am part of that super soul,
I am this eternal relative,
and you love your relative.
So this bhakti is a natural consequence of any process that you follow.
So all the other processes are meant to take us to the platform of bhakti,
and when a person reaches bhakti,
he is able to understand the perfect knowledge.
So we have to engage that is why in devotional service of God.
So that is why I humbly request all of you,
please do not just think that by only reading without engaging in devotional service,
you will be able to understand.
It will take a very, very, very long time.
So read and the bhakti begins with chanting.
It is so simple.
Krishna has made things very simple.
So please chant and realize very nicely.
And when you start understanding,
explain this knowledge to others also.
Sweat it out for Krishna.
We have to slog it out for Krishna,
work hard for Krishna.
Arjuna fought very nicely for Krishna,
very valiantly.
Jambavan fought for 28 days.
When Krishna was satisfied, his bones were broken.
He was very tired.
Then he got the knowledge of Krishna perfectly.
So we have to tire ourselves in the service of Krishna.
A comfortable life does not fetch even material success,
what to speak of spiritual success.
So that is why this sadhana bhakti, tapasya is required.
So every day, please, as a matter of tapasya,
you like it or do not like it,
do this tapasya of chanting, reading every day,
and then preaching, spreading this knowledge.
