So we understood how people are doing Ashtanga yoga and that is also a yajna.
And yet there are many other yajnas which suit particular mentality and physiology of people.
What are those yajnas which are mentioned here?
So let us see verse number 28, chapter 4 of Bhagavad Gita, Transcendental Knowledge.
Dravya yajnas tapo yajna, yoga yajnas tatha pare, swadhyaya yajna yajnas cha, yata yasam shita vratah.
Translation. There are others who, enlightened by sacrificing their material possessions in severe austerities,
take strict vows and practice the yoga of eightfold mysticism
and others study the Vedas for the advancement of transcendental knowledge.
So here it is mentioned, various yajnas, dravya yajna.
We discussed last time also. For the first timers, I'll explain.
Dravya means material, dravya yajna means sacrifice of material possessions.
We all have some possessions, some gold, jewelry, ornaments, grains as people would have before.
We have money, wealth. So when we sacrifice our material possessions,
could be anything that is called dravya yajna and even doing charity,
opening charitable institutions, hospitals, educational institutes or any kind of charity.
That is also called dravya yajna because sacrifice of material possession is involved.
So those who are enlightened by sacrificing material possessions,
now we have to understand simply by sacrificing material possessions that is not end in itself.
When a person is sacrificing, sacrificing, then gradually a person starts realizing the importance of tapasya,
voluntarily accepting discomfort in life.
When a person voluntarily accepts discomforts, then what happens? Purification.
That is why Ayurveda says it is sometimes when we are diseased.
So the best medicine, Srila Prabhupada also says, is fasting, unwanted guests and disease.
If you don't feed them, they will go away.
So the body has to spend energy. If you put food, body has to put energy in digesting the food.
When we are sick, the digestive fire is still weaker.
So if we eat very less, we fast, then all the energy of the body, it gets engaged in repair work.
So thus tapasya fasting is very, very important for spiritual advancement, for upkeep of material fitness as well.
So a person realizes if I want to advance in spiritual life, tapasya is very, very important.
So by sacrificing his possessions, gradually it comes to the level of performing severe austerities, tapo yajna.
And then those who are enlightened by sacrificing material possessions engage in severe austerities.
And then they take strict vows and practice the yoga of eightfold mysticism.
That is next level. They are elevated to the dhyana yajna or dhyana yoga.
That is called yoga yajna.
And yet there are others who study the Vedas for the advancement of transcendental knowledge.
So if a person is reading Vedas, he also is performing yajna. He is also doing sacrifice.
He could have enjoyed so much. He would have written mundane novels, some other things.
But then he has sacrificed all those things to get knowledge.
So this yajna is called swadhyaya yajna or dhyana yajna.
So dravi yajna, tapo yajna, yoga yajna, swadhyaya yajna.
All these various yajnas a person is supposed to perform.
Just like the Shat Goswami is in Vrindavan.
So they sacrificed all their material possessions.
So they were ministers. They sacrificed everything.
Dravi yajna and then tapo yajna. They were engaged in strict austerities.
They would eat very less, sleep almost nil, every night under different tree.
And swadhyaya, dhyana yajna, they would also write literatures, read literatures.
In this way they were engaged. All these yajnas are important.
Then another kind of yajna is mentioned here.
And there are even others who are inclined to the process of breath restraint to remain in trance.
And they practice stopping the movement of the outgoing breath into the incoming.
And incoming breath into the outgoing.
And thus at last remain in trance, stopping all breathing.
Some of them curtailing the eating process offer the outgoing breath into itself as a sacrifice.
So Shilpa Prabhupada is explaining this system of yoga for controlling the breathing process is called pranayama.
And in the beginning it is practiced in hut yoga system by different sitting postures.
So pranayama is also yajna.
They are inclined to the process of breath restraint to remain in trance.
So as long as we are in this body, if we are highly conditioned by the body,
it is not possible to understand spiritual knowledge, then all this hut yoga, various sitting postures
and using this mechanical method of arriving in a state of complete peace and trance is recommended.
Just like the very naughty students sometimes in a class, they are given punishment.
All hands up in the air or stand on the bench or stand outside the class.
Or like this various punishments, physical punishments would be given to them.
Those who are not intelligent, those who are intelligent simply by hearing the orders,
the instructions of the teacher, they would follow and advance in their education.
So those people who are intelligent, then they read the Vedas, they take instructions directly from Krishna.
And the most intelligent engage directly in the service of Krishna.
Those who are less intelligent, they are very much in the bodily concept of life,
highly controlled by the body, the bodily changes.
So they are told, okay, there is a physical process also because you are so much absorbed in your body.
You have noticed when we are angry, the breath becomes very shallow and very rapid.
So in this way, if you make it the breath very, very slow, you will become peaceful.
You are highly conditioned by the body. So you practice this.
You control the breath and by controlling breath gradually you come into trance.
So for less intelligent people, so that is why it is recommended in the Shrimad Bhagavatam, all other Vedas,
various people are there having various levels of intelligence.
So those who are not very advanced, they can do this,
stopping the movement of outgoing breath into the incoming.
But this is also very, very severe. Even though a person is less intelligent,
he needs to have many other qualifications to do this kind of yoga.
A person has to stop breathing also. Just imagine you're not breathing at all.
This is called Pranayama. Very, very tough for people of this age.
Even though a person may not be intelligent in Kali Yoga,
but still in Kali Yoga there is no other way. They cannot perform this process at all.
Many other qualifications, having a long life, having a peaceful mind, all these things are required.
Renunciation is required to do this. Pranayama does not mean simply do some breath in and breath out
so that you can gain some physical fitness.
But it is to help us attain this end of stopping all breathing and remaining in trance
when mind becomes completely peaceful and then you can think of Krishna within the heart,
dharana, dhyana, samadhi, then you attain love of Krishna, then engage in his seva
and you follow the long process.
So all these various kinds of sacrifice are recommended.
But in Bhagavatam it is mentioned, the most intelligent people,
so it is being explained in various ages, Krishna is to be worshipped separately.
Spiritual perfection is attained by following various methods.
So in Kali Yuga, the most intelligent people, which method they will follow?
Sankirtana means
When many many people, militva, they assemble together and they sing the glories of the holy name of Krishna,
that is called sankirtana.
So the most intelligent people, sumedhasa, medhasa means wise, sumedhasa means extremely wise, most wise.
So very intelligent people, they will not fall for other processes,
but sankirtana prior, they will do sankirtana, assembling together in large numbers, that is why you see.
There is a system of many people sitting together and singing, doing bhajan, kirtan,
there are big processions, rath yatra, jagannath puri festival,
lakhs and lakhs of people will assemble,
and then you have such an amazing sankirtana along with the rath yatra, the card ceremony.
So this is the process for Kali Yuga, sankirtana prior, yajanti, sumedhasa.
But those who are not very advanced, because there are various ages, various people are there,
so all these different processes are mentioned.
Some of them curtailing the eating process offer the outgoing breath into itself as a sacrifice.
So this curtailing the eating process, this is also very very important.
If you want to advance in spiritual life, you have to curtail the eating process.
So people do not know the science.
If you eat very tasty dishes, then all the material desires, lust, anger, all these things increase in the body.
So that is why the spiritualist has to control first of all the eating process.
Do not eat anything which is not offered to Krishna,
and among the offered food items also have a very simple prasadam, many for yourself.
For Krishna, best of the dishes, but for us it should be very very simple.
And when you curtail the eating process, all the senses come under control.
So we want to eat so much, and then people tell I am not able to concentrate,
I am having distracted mind, disturbed things, I am not able to chant nicely.
So all these things will happen if the tongue is not controlled.
So curtailing the eating process is very much required for a devotee.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu gave the instruction,
Do not eat very tasty food stuffs.
Do not wear very gorgeous dress in order to become center of attraction, simple living,
simple food stuffs, and then a person can control the senses.
Now this is very nice shloka, Lord Krishna mentions,
All these performers who know the meaning of sacrifice become cleansed of sinful reaction,
and having tasted the nectar of the remnants of such sacrifice, they go to the supreme eternal atmosphere.
So various yajnas have been mentioned.
It started with Shrotradini, the brahmachari which he does yajna, yajna of hearing process,
and then yajna of offering sense objects to satisfy the senses of Krishna, indriya, agnishu,
and after that we understood the yoga yajna, dandravya yajna, jnana yajna, pranayama yajna, so many yajnas have been described.
So it is important to know, Srila Prabhupada is explaining,
What is the purpose of all these yajnas, why I am doing these yajnas, it is important to know.
The purpose of yajnas is to purify the conditioned soul because of impurities the soul thinks,
soul gets bewildered and soul thinks I am this body,
and soul is not able to understand the supreme spirit, I am part and parcel of supreme spirit.
So to bring this clarity impurities have to be removed, the soul has to purify itself.
So who will get this purification?
So here it is mentioned in Dishloka.
All these performers who know the meaning of sacrifice become cleansed of sinful reaction.
So the cleansing will happen when a person is knowing the meaning of sacrifice.
If a person does not know the meaning of sacrifice, then all the sacrifice, all the activities remain but on material platform.
So sometimes people may become very happy, I am very very religious person,
I am going to the temple, I am ringing the bell, offering some coconut and something,
and I am doing very nice process, nicely I did vivaha yajna, I offered my daughter kanyada and everything happened,
and I am very expert in following all the rules and regulations.
But do you know the meaning of all this process? Why are you doing all these things?
So here Krishna is telling if you do not know the meaning, then you cannot become cleansed of sinful reaction.
All these performers who know the meaning of the sacrifice become cleansed of sinful reaction.
So knowing the meaning behind the sacrifice, behind the spiritual activities,
all these rituals that are offered in the Vedas, it is very very important.
So Lord Krishna mentions,
naayam loko asti ayajnasya kuto anya kuru sattama, o best of the Kuru dynasty,
without sacrifice one can never live happily on this planet or in this life, what then of the next?
So no, it is very difficult, then I am not able to understand the meaning, then what is the use of all these things?
That is why people give up at times, I do not understand the meaning of the rituals, so I don't want to follow.
I want to have a logical background of everything.
So I would not agree to do it. So Krishna is telling if you do not do it without sacrifice,
one can never live happily on this planet or in this life, what then of the next?
So doing sacrifice is important and knowing the meaning also is important.
Without doing sacrifice, nobody has ever lived happily, just like without giving taxes,
no citizen can live happily peacefully. He is considered a criminal.
Eham evam bahuvidha yajna vidita brahmano mukhe,
karma jaan viditaan sarvaan evam gyaatva vimoksha se.
All these different types of sacrifice are approved by the Vedas and all of them are born of different types of work.
Knowing them as such, you will become liberated.
So again Krishna is telling, knowing them as such, you will become liberated.
So knowing the yajnas is very very important.
O chastiser of the enemy, the sacrifice of knowledge is greater than the sacrifice of material possessions.
O son of Pritha, after all the sacrifice of work culminates in transcendental knowledge.
So here Krishna is telling why you are doing yajnas?
O chastiser of the enemy, the sacrifice of knowledge is greater than the sacrifice of material possessions.
Now a person has to choose. So many yajnas you have told, which yajna should I perform?
All yajnas they give equal benefit or one yajna is superior to another.
So Lord Krishna is mentioning here, the sacrifice of knowledge is greater than the sacrifice of material possessions.
Why? Why so? O son of Pritha, after all the sacrifice of work culminates in transcendental knowledge.
Because whatever sacrifice you are doing, the end result is transcendental knowledge.
So if you are wise, directly you can go and pick up transcendental knowledge.
So just like I gave the example, the naughty boys or naughty students, they do not understand the purpose why they have come to school.
So they have to be given strict punishment. Without punishment, the sense doesn't strike them.
In a similar fashion, the purpose of all the yajnas is not to get some material benefits,
some material facilities because they are anyway not going to satisfy us.
The purpose of all the yajnas is ultimately to get transcendental knowledge, spiritual knowledge.
So that is why the yajna, the sacrifice of knowledge, jnana yajna, is greater than the sacrifice of material possessions.
So a person who is wise, sacrifice has to be done for knowledge, let me directly engage myself in getting knowledge.
And if a person does not know this, entire life he would be following rituals, many many rituals.
But if he does not know the purpose, then whatever he may do, all those activities but remain on a material platform.
So devotees ask Prabhupada, that Prabhupada we are doing so much of Sankirtana.
And you will find devotees, we do lot of Sankirtana inside the temple, outside the temple, wherever we are travelling,
we keep on chanting or doing Sankirtana with instruments or silently we do japa on our beads.
But always we are chanting the names. So why so much Sankirtana is there?
Why we have to go out Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, going out on the streets and chanting in public?
So why all these things are recommended?
And if a person happens to hear, what benefit is it going to give to that person?
And that person does not know that this name is Krishna's name and then we are doing this Sankirtana.
So what benefit a person does? Or for that matter we do prasadam distribution, this is another very important activity.
So that is why we are doing Akshaya Patra, lakhs of children they are getting prasadam, Krishna prasadam.
And otherwise also in all the temples we do prasadam distribution. Anybody who comes, we make sure at least some prasadam,
some khichdi, pongal, something is given to that devotee who comes.
So we are giving this prasadam. If a person does not know it is Krishna prasadam, he simply eats it, takes it as something good.
What will happen to that person? Will that person make spiritual advancement?
So Prabhupada told no. Oh, no spiritual advancement? By hearing Krishna's name, by taking Krishna prasadam, he is not making spiritual advancement?
So the answer is no. Shri Prabhupada explains here.
So very clearly it is mentioned here.
Without attainment of knowledge, sacrifices remain on material platform and bestow no spiritual benefit.
So if a person is not knowing that this prasadam which I am taking, it is prasadam, Krishna is their supreme lord, it is his remnant, I am eating that.
It is transcendental food. Or if a person does not know these are the names of God, God is incarnated in his name and he is hearing Sankirtana,
then he is not making spiritual advancement. So then why do we do these activities?
So the purpose is agnyasukriti. What is agnyasukriti?
Sukriti means good activities. There are various kinds of sukritis.
Three sukritis are there.
Bhogonmukhi, mokshonmukhi and bhaktonmukhi or bhajanonmukhi sukriti.
Bhogonmukhi sukriti means these kinds of good activities if you do.
Just like Dravya Yajna, other yajnas are mentioned. If you perform nicely, what will happen?
If you do charity, you teach others, you feed the poor, give some clothes and do all these charities, then what is going to happen?
You are going to become very rich in your next life and you will be very beautiful.
You will have various skills in this planet or other higher planets where advanced living entities live.
So all these material benefits you will give.
Bhogonmukhi, bhoga will be nice. Bhoga means enjoyment.
You will have nice facilities for material enjoyment.
And there is some sukriti which is called mokshonmukhi.
So this bhogonmukhi sukriti, these pious activities, good activities, charity and all.
The Vaishnavas don't approve this thing. Why?
Because next life when you get a good birth, you are very beautiful.
You are having wisdom, knowledge, eloquency, wealth.
Then again you associate with bad habits and then you again go down to hell.
In this way, like a wheel, ferris wheel, it keeps on going happiness and distress.
A person keeps on going up and down, sometimes happy, distress.
Then sometimes he may come and do pious activities, good activities.
With good activities he gets material riches, possessions, beauty.
And again he commits sinful activities, starts enjoying indiscriminately the material world.
Again he suffers and goes down to hell.
So that is why these good activities are not recommended by the Vaishnavas, intelligent people.
So good activities are good as long as a person somehow is able to understand the knowledge
that now I don't have to struggle for my bread and butter.
So let me save time for Krishna consciousness.
So that is why if by Krishna's grace, we are not dying out of starvation.
We are not having no clothes on our body.
So then we should not waste time in arranging and just spending valuable human form of life
in satisfying our greed and showing off to society.
Rather every moment should be used for spiritual advancement.
So if a person is able to realize this, then this material opulences are good
because he need not work hard for bread and butter and maintaining body and soul together.
He can simply focus on spiritual life.
But otherwise in most of the cases people get degraded.
So that is why it is not recommended.
Then there is moksha and mukhi sukriti.
Sukriti which gives a person moksha, emerges into the light in the spiritual world
which is coming out of Krishna's body, spiritual effulgence.
So that is also not considered very good.
That is spiritual death.
In spiritual body you could have enjoyed with the God, spoken with the Lord, played, eaten with the Lord.
But then you simply merged as a particle in the spiritual world.
So that is also not recommended.
So another sukriti, the best sukriti is bhajanon mukhi sukriti or bhakton mukhi sukriti.
Sukriti which helps us to get devotional service in future.
So when we are doing prasadam distribution, kirtan, it is giving people bhajanon mukhi or bhakton mukhi sukriti.
Although they are not making spiritual advancement
but they are coming very close to spiritual advancement by this process.
The horse has come very close to water.
So it will not die.
So anytime it can drink.
So in a similar fashion when a person eats prasadam
he will get without any knowledge that this is prasadam.
A person is simply ignorant.
You passed on some food which is offered to him.
He does not know this is offered.
He eats and he appreciates.
So this is nice.
So he gets more chance to get prasadam.
And then it gets prasadam.
Then much more chance he has to get prasadam.
Similarly, here's Hare Krishna.
He gets more chance to hear Hare Krishna.
More chance to associate with devotees.
So this is called agyat sukriti.
Knowingly he has not done, unknowingly.
So agyat sukriti when a person does in this manner
he does not make spiritual advancement
because he is not doing devotional service in knowledge.
He is doing devotional service in tamas, in ignorance.
Then such devotional service will not give you spiritual advancement
but it will give you chance to come closer to devotional service.
Advance in spiritual life in future.
So thus it is very very important to have knowledge.
We are chanting Hare Krishna Mahamantra
but we do not know what is this Hare Krishna.
What is the science behind this chanting?
What is holy name? Who is Krishna?
What is Bhagavad Gita?
If you do not cultivate this knowledge
then we remain neophyte.
We are doing Deity worship very very nicely every day.
Without fail.
3.30 in the morning I am getting up.
4 o'clock, 4.15 I am doing mangala aarti every day.
I am very fixed up.
Shatkarmanipurna viparaya.
I am living like a beggar.
I have offered all my possessions in charity.
I am completely dependent on whatever God arranges I will take that.
But I am not a preacher.
Then nectar of instruction mentions and in other places it is mentioned.
I am not able to understand.
I do not have higher knowledge.
Archayam ev haraye.
But I am very very strict in Deity worship.
I have all Brahminical qualifications.
I have perfect mind control.
I have perfect sense control.
I have great forgiveness.
I don't take offense from any living entity.
I am a perfect Brahmana.
Sabhakta prakrita smrita.
He is considered a neophyte prakrita.
Prakrita means he is on material platform only.
So we should not remain in illusion.
I am following sadhana very very nicely.
Very very strictly.
Deity worship I am doing.
If beyond Deity worship you have not risen to the platform of
knowledge and preaching then we are neophyte on material platform only.
If you are not able to understand what is God there are doubts in life.
So sometimes we get the questions that there are so many doubts.
I am not able to understand still.
So what advancement we have made.
If we follow the yagya nicely Sankirtan yagya any yagya we are doing.
We are supposed to elevate advance in knowledge.
I am going to the school but I am failing.
It means we are not attentive.
We are not following the process nicely.
People are going in getting good knowledge good scores.
I am also spending same time in school but I am failing in exams.
It means I am not attending the lectures.
I am not hearing properly.
I am not doing the assignments or I am missing the process somewhere.
Great clarity knowledge and advancement should come if we follow the process nicely.
So thus sometimes people simply stick to the rituals.
Let me get up.
Let me offer everything.
Keep on worshipping Krishna unless we understand Krishna.
What is Krishna?
We are doing japa.
Bhakti Vinod Thakur says before doing japa a person should understand that this japa,
this Hare Krishna Mahamantra, it is non-different from Krishna.
This knowledge is required.
So if a person is not having knowledge then the activities, the yagya remain on a material platform.
So a person may think that is why some people ask so much japa you are doing.
But still we see gross mistakes in his behaviour.
The character has not changed.
Still he is addicted to intoxication.
Sometimes when you go to dham you will see somebody is there, some sadhu is there.
He is sitting with mala and everything but then he is smoking some weeds along with that.
So why this tendency anartha has not gone?
Because on material platform.
He has not advanced in knowledge.
So gaining knowledge is very very important.
So that is why we should always ask why, why, why this, why that, why all these yajnas are given?
So Srila Prabhupada explains here.
Nonetheless there is a mystery about all these different activities of sacrifice.
And one should know this mystery.
So all these activities are very mysterious.
Mystery is not easy to understand but one should know this mystery.
Sacrifice sometimes take different forms according to particular faith of the performer.
When one's faith reaches the stage of transcendental knowledge, spiritual knowledge
the performer of sacrifice should be considered more advanced than one
who simply sacrifices material possessions without such knowledge.
So if a person is sacrificing his material possessions without knowledge
for whom these sacrifices are meant for
then he is not considered very advanced in his life.
So thus gaining knowledge, getting knowledge is very very important.
Transcendental knowledge.
So that is why Krishna tells in 2nd chapter also those who are regular you would have noticed.
So Krishna mentions in 2nd chapter.
All the purpose of a small well or reservoir of water is served by a lake or a huge reservoir.
In a similar fashion
Whatever is mentioned in the Vedas
all the purposes of Vedas are served to a person who knows the purpose behind them.
So why these Vedas are mentioned?
Why Karmakanda? Why Gyanakanda? Why Upasnakanda? Why?
So a person should know this why always.
Why I am doing all these activities?
Why the society is divided into varnas and ashramas?
What is the purpose? Is the purpose sense enjoyment?
So here you can see all these Yajnas, there is one common thread.
What is that thread?
If a person is Brahmachari, sacrifice.
Do not hear everything.
Do not focus your hearing completely on hearing spiritual subject matter from the spiritual master.
Sacrifice, controlling the senses.
If a person is grahastha, then he has to sacrifice sense objects for the service of Krishna.
Again sacrifice, controlling senses is required.
Take the things only which are enjoyed by the senses of Krishna.
This is sacrifice of grahastha.
Then sacrifice of breathing process.
Sacrifice of eating.
Sacrifice of knowledge.
So everywhere controlling the senses is the common thread.
And if I am doing pranayama for enjoying the senses as people fall in the West
and now it is there in our country also.
If you do this yoga, your hunger will increase, you can eat more.
And then your sexual power increases, you can enjoy more sexual life.
And for this people are doing yoga.
So the purpose is forgotten.
Marriage is taken a license for sense enjoyment rather marriage is to control the senses.
The purpose is finished.
So that is why we have to understand why the system of marriage is there.
That is why this marriage which is a ceremony which advances us in spiritual life.
It has become a license for mundane enjoyment.
It has become a mundane activity.
So rather than giving spiritual advancement, it is pulling a person down to material platform.
A person was more advanced without marriage.
After marriage he has gone down.
Ideally after marriage he should have advanced more.
So brahmanas se vijanataha.
If a person knows the purpose behind all the Vedas, then all the purposes of Vedas are served to him.
We just need to understand purpose why Vedas are written.
Why these different yajnas are mentioned.
So what is the purpose? That is also mentioned.
In the final scripture composed by the Vedavya, Srimad Bhagavatam,
Atha Pumbir Dvija Shrestha, Varnasrama Vibhagasha,
Svanusthita Siddharmasya, Samsiddhir Hari Toshanam, Hari Toshanam.
For the pleasure of Hari, the Varnasrama, all these yajnas have been prescribed to a person.
So pleasure of Hari is the ultimate thing.
So if a person understands the pleasure of Hari is the ultimate thing,
and in this mood, for the pleasure of Hari, he is hearing Hari Katha, he is hearing the Vedas.
For the pleasure of Hari, he is engaging in his household duties, affairs, he is going to office, coming back,
he is fighting a war or not fighting a war.
If he does in this consciousness, then that is the highest, top most spiritual activities.
Top most spiritual activity.
And if the knowledge is not there, that is mundane activity.
So now the question is, understood Prabhu, knowledge is very important.
Understanding why I am doing this activity is very important to make that activity spiritual.
So how to get this knowledge?
So I will let me read Bhagavad Gita very nicely and I will understand this knowledge.
So that is why one of the most frequently and widely quoted verses of Bhagavad Gita is discussed next.
What is that shloka? Please keep this shloka in heart, very important verse.
Lord Krishna is now mentioning, how do you know this why?
How do you get this transcendental knowledge?
So Lord Krishna mentions,
Tad viddhi pranipatena pariprashnena sevaya
Upadekshanti tegyanam gyaninastatvadarshinah
So Lord Krishna mentions,
So Lord Krishna mentions,
Tad viddhi, just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master.
Inquire from him submissively and render service unto him.
The self-realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.
So first spiritual master is Krishna.
Krishna is seated in our hearts.
So the living entity is seated in yantra. Yantra means machine.
This body is called machine in Bhagavad Gita. We will read.
And Krishna is directing the wandering of living entities throughout the universe.
Sometimes top planets, sometimes nether regions.
And when the living entity seeks truth, then Krishna is seated in that.
He guides him towards a right spiritual master.
So Krishna is first spiritual master and when he sees the sincerity of the living entity,
then the spiritual master in the heart, Chaitya Guru, he guides us to external spiritual master.
So now Krishna is revealing the importance that yes, even though God is there,
but taking the knowledge of spiritual master, approaching the spiritual master,
is very very important for a sincere candidate to advance in spiritual life.
So in order to have this spiritual knowledge, what is the process?
Very very important, scientific, significant three steps are mentioned.
The first word which is used here is pranipatena.
Means inquire from him submissively, surrender.
Just like if you have to take knowledge of any field,
you have to take admission in that school and knowledge by surrendering.
Whatever the school or the college institution demands,
this much money you have to give, okay sir, given.
This much, this kind of uniform you have to wear, okay done.
These many marks you have to score to get admission here, okay done.
I will try to score those marks also.
This language you have to be proficient in, give this language proficiency test,
okay I will give this language test also.
And like this, so many conditions they would put and a person has to surrender completely
if he wants to have knowledge.
He cannot argue, okay let me come and see and then I will see, I will follow you.
No, first of all follow, surrender nicely.
Especially this transcendental knowledge, it is a personal knowledge.
So unless a person is pleased, we show chastity, there is no transmission of knowledge.
So this we can understand from Bhagavad Gita.
You see Arjuna is putting forth so many arguments.
So Krishna, this is paap, that is paap, this is happened,
Varnasankara will happen and destruction of dynasty,
family tradition will happen and Krishna, do you kill your superiors?
Why are you telling me to kill the superiors?
Like this Arjuna was talking in a friendly way to Krishna.
Krishna did not impart any knowledge.
So when Arjuna agreed to become a disciple,
shishya shitehaam, I am your disciple, shishya I agree to be controlled by you,
shadi maam tvam prapanam,
so I am surrendering, please instruct me.
So then Krishna started instructing.
So that is why unless there is surrender, there is no transmission of knowledge.
If there are friendly talks, then it is not possible to have knowledge.
To get knowledge, surrenderence is required.
Surrenderence to a unique personality.
Now blind surrenderence is not mentioned here.
When you are sick, you will not blindly surrender to any person.
You will find a good doctor who is expert, who has been able to cure many people,
who has degrees, you will do some use of intelligence, some verification.
But then surrendering to doctor is important.
Ok doctor, whatever you want, you sign.
Please open my heart, open my stomach and do whatever you want.
I agree to you, I surrender.
I give my life in your hands.
And then if he surrenders to a wise doctor, the doctor can give life to a patient.
He can extend his life span.
Crude example.
So surrenderence is required in material affairs also.
How much more surrenderence is required for spiritual affairs?
So that is why we have seen some, that is why spiritual life is so crucial.
You need to have personal guidance always.
So we see some people, they are following all the processes very nicely.
But the knowledge of why is not that they don't properly understand.
And thus they are not able to surrender.
They will follow sadhana very nicely.
So I have seen devotees chanting 16 rounds.
More than 16 also.
And very austere, very simple food they will have.
And they will do preaching also, they will help go and spread the knowledge also.
And not 50%, they will give more than 100% of their salary also.
Oh Prabhu, money is required, please take it.
And no problem, I will borrow.
I have credit card, please take more money.
I am earning this much, they will donate more also at times.
And then they will do some partying, some extra things, some online and they would raise money.
Like this we have seen devotees.
So doing everything very nicely.
But pranipatiyana is not there.
No, here spiritual master is good and there are many spiritual masters.
So let me hear from here also, from there also and many other places.
So that is not going to help.
Then we are not surrendered completely.
That is an offense.
So that is why we have to find a personality.
If you are not able to surrender, that is alright.
Keep on searching, keep on finding.
But eagerness should be there to find a personality, to find a tattva darshi.
Tattva means truth.
Darshi means who has seen the truth.
Not just theoretically, practically you should have seen Krishna, you should have seen truth.
Such a personality I need to find.
And such personalities exist always at all times.
And they are willing to give association.
Provided a person is sincere, Krishna will guide.
So we have to become very, very eager to find a person where I can surrender.
And then we will be guided.
As soon as we become very, very eager to find a tattva darshi, Krishna seated in the heart will guide us.
So this surrender is required.
So that is why,
First of all it is important,
Adav, beginning Guruvashrayam.
Take the ashraya of a Guru.
And then saddharmapriccha.
You ask him the true principles of religion.
Or the true religion, the topmost religion.
So pranipatena is required.
Find a tattva darshi and surrender.
Become very, very humble.
We cannot argue, we cannot.
So keep on hearing, asking.
Hear for one year, Prabhupada tells.
And then you should surrender.
You should find out.
And yes, I have surrendered.
So he is my spiritual master.
I have agreed.
So what have you learned from your spiritual master?
For last many years you have been following.
So no, I do not know.
I do not know this thing.
So no, that is also not right.
That is why second step is there.
Some people have rubber stamping of spiritual master.
Okay, I have surrendered to this person.
He is my spiritual master.
But then I do not have intelligence.
I do not have eagerness to ask from him.
Spiritual master.
Teacher means you go to teacher to get knowledge.
So that is why the scripture still.
Do not, just like we keep dogs.
I have a dog in my house.
So similarly, do not keep a spiritual master like that.
Just like you have various animals in your house.
No, spiritual master should be accepted for what?
When a person is very, very sincere to inquire about truth,
then a person should get spiritual master,
should approach a spiritual master.
It should not be taken as a fashion thing.
Oh, many people have dogs.
I have this very advanced species of dog in my house for sure.
So I have this great guru.
He is very famous.
He is liberated personality.
Paramhansa.
I am his disciple.
No.
So for getting material social reputation and getting some solace,
he will deliver me.
No.
If you are very, very eager to find the.
Then you should approach.
So humility is required.
Surrender is required.
And then Pariprasnena inquiries are required.
So Pariprasnena inquiry can happen by reading the books
or by putting forth questions in such a manner.
So, yes, I have been hearing a lot.
I've been asking a lot of questions.
I have surrendered nicely.
I've accepted somebody, a spiritual master.
So will I get knowledge?
No, that is why we are discussing.
People ask that still so much confusion is there in life.
Clarity does not come because we have missed the third factor.
What is the third factor?
That is, say via please read very carefully,
inquire from him submissively and render service unto him.
Krishna is also mentioning.
And then say via render service unto him.
And then what will happen?
They will reveal the spiritual knowledge to you.
So I am very humble.
I am asking questions also.
I am reading also.
But have I rendered service?
So much time I am investing in my business, in my job.
So am I investing some time, some energy, some life force
in the service of spiritual master?
Some prana I am putting in the seva of Guru.
Ideally, every moment should be engaged.
An advanced devotee should see even one moment is not passed without service of Guru.
This is human life.
Every moment only for the satisfaction of Guru and Krishna.
But if we not give every moment, at least every day few hours we should give.
At least weekends when we have time instead of sleeping and sense enjoyment.
Let me engage my prana in service of Guru, service of Tatvadarshi.
Seva ya prana.
Am I engaging my prana?
My time, energy, life force.
I am having money.
Am I engaging my money in the service of Guru?
Arthaya.
So these are the four varieties in which seva should be done.
Shastras mention pranayar arthayar dhiyavacha.
So am I engaging my money in the service of Guru?
Dhiya.
I am using my intelligence in so many ways to get material resources.
Am I engaging this intelligence in the service of spiritual master?
My spiritual master has a mission and he has come here to help the suffering conditioned souls.
Have I ever thought of helping my spiritual master expanding the mission?
Am I thinking how to expand the mission?
How to help my spiritual master?
How to do it?
Have I used my intelligence in such a manner?
Dhiya.
Okay, I am not intelligent.
I cannot think.
I am very simple person.
No problem.
Vacha.
So propaganda is required.
Just speak to other person.
Please chant the names of Krishna.
Please offer the bhoga to Krishna and take the remnants.
Please read this book.
This book is very, very nice.
Vacha.
In this way, we can use Vacha.
So pranayar arthayar dhiyavacha.
In all these four manners, we have to engage.
Now, if you do not have something just like somebody is a brahmachari.
Now, brahmachari does not earn money.
How he can do arthayar?
No problem.
Then Krishna sees this person is not having how he can serve.
But if you are having something, then some portion of something has to be offered.
If you are having some energy, we are there on the bed.
We are bedridden.
Now, what a bedridden person can engage his life and energy in service of Krishna.
No problem.
He can use dhiya.
He can use vacha in the service of Krishna.
He can use artha in service of Krishna.
So Krishna is seated in the heart.
He just wants to see our sincerity.
How sincerely whatever we have, we are engaged in his service.
Otherwise, if we have nothing, we do not have any resources,
then in mind you offer service to Krishna.
Manasa puja is also very, very bona fide way.
One of the Puranas mentioned one brahmana once he was sitting in Bhagavatam pravachan.
And while hearing Bhagavatam, he understood about this manas puja
that if you do not have sufficient resources with you,
then in mind also you can offer and it has the same effect.
He became very delighted.
Then in the mind, he made a nice throne, constructed a nice jewel throne,
invited Krishna to sit on that throne,
and he started offering various puja, abhishekam, dresses and everything to Krishna in the mind.
And then he started cooking nice bhoga for Krishna.
And then he made some kind of sweet rice for Krishna.
And then it is not offered very hot.
So he wanted to check whether it is not too hot because it should be offered cold.
And then just when he was testing whether this is not very hot,
his finger in the mind got burnt.
And then he opened his eyes to realize his actual finger also got burnt.
So this historical example is there.
So you are surprised. What is this?
In mind my finger got burnt.
Reality also it has happened.
He was so much absorbed in this seva.
So then in Vaikunthai it is described,
Lakshmi Narayan was sitting and Narayan started smiling
and immediately sent a plane from Vaikuntha to receive that Brahmana,
to call that Brahmana back to go ahead immediately.
So if a person is sincere, is not having any resources, does not matter.
In mind he can offer.
But if we have and if we are not offering, then that is cheating.
That will not help us advance.
So thus please keep this shloka in heart.
Always see how much I am becoming humble and how much I am surrendering.
Have I surrendered completely to a Tatvadarshi?
And after surrendering, am I engaged in rigorous reading, understanding, questioning,
pariprasnena, understanding the subject matter, clearing my doubts?
And by following the process, doing sadhana, surrendering, still doubts are not cleared.
Am I doing seva?
pranayar artheer dhiyavacha
If you follow this process,
tadubdhikshanti te jnanam
then transcendental knowledge will be revealed in the heart.
If you follow this, Krishna has told this is the process.
So if you follow this process, it is going to work.
There is no question.
It is not going to work.
So please keep this shloka in mind.
Very, very important.
So when we have this transcendental knowledge and then we engage in service of Krishna,
then it brings us very swift and quick advancement.
Then all the yajnas are successful.
Our Sankirtan Yajna is also successful.
So this is the way of receiving transcendental knowledge,
which is the ultimate objective of all the yajnas.
With this...
