So Amitasana Prabhu asked Brijendra Prabhu that what is this? He wears some dark thread on his leg.
So what is this you are wearing? It looks very strange.
So then Prabhu revealed and it was very surprising for me also.
So Prabhu had some issue, some physical issue that is called naval dislocation is there.
So sometimes you know we dance a lot in kirtans and otherwise also we go on long parikramas, govardhan parikrama and many pilgrimages.
So it becomes little difficult at times. The devotee cannot dance, cannot jump and he has to walk very slowly, very cautiously.
And anytime if dislocation happens then there is intense pain in the stomach and there is no cure.
Allopathy does not know what to do. Anyway they will just give you some antibiotics, some medicines or they will suggest surgery.
This is what they do. So in any kind of medicine he could not find anything. He tried many many things for it.
Then he told once when he was there in the Gurgaon center, one of the servants there, he was going to his house.
And Prabhu asked him, why, where are you going? So he told, no, my stomach is a little upset.
How is your stomach upset? You are going to the Gurgaon, how is your stomach going to be fine in the Gurgaon?
So he told, no, no, it is a different kind of upset.
How is it different? Then he explained, he had a similar situation.
So really then what are you going to do in the village?
So he told, in the village there is a person, tantrik, he does this very nice tantra.
And so I tried this thing. He also had some chronic problem or the same thing.
So he told, for last five years I was using this tantra and it was perfectly alright. Nothing happened to me.
He told, then what happened? Then I visited some crematorium and in crematorium the tantra breaks down.
So now again I am having this problem. So I am going to rush to that person and I am very confident that he will help me again.
So really is that the problem? Let me also come with you. I have been suffering from this issue for a long time.
So he told, no, you need not come. You just give me 200 bucks and I will get that tantra for you also.
You have to wear it and just don't visit crematorium. In crematorium it breaks down.
So what is the science in crematorium? It breaks down.
And anyway, so then he got it for Prabhu also and although he was having very frequently such dislocations and problems,
but for last one year he is wearing and there is no problem at all. So it is surprising.
Without anything and he was so much under trouble because of this and now it is perfectly alright.
So these are sciences. So that is why it is told, whenever you see any corpse,
even some people are carrying on the last for the last rites funeral procession, then you have to take bath immediately.
You become contaminated simply by seeing their procession. And if at all you happen to visit the last rites,
those last ceremonies definitely have to take bath. And actually people would not enter their houses
because entire house would become contaminated. They would take bath and enter like that. This was a custom.
So like this many many things are there. So many people they tell, so why it is there?
Some rules and regulations are there. Women are not allowed in temple for certain time.
And these kind of people, children are not allowed somewhere. Men are not allowed to do this thing.
And so many rules and regulations are there. So why all these rules and regulations?
The place where you are eating, honoring prasadam, when you get up, even though nothing is fallen,
the culture is with a wet cloth, that place has to be cleaned. So the disciples asked prabhupada,
nothing has fallen. Why should we clean? So prabhupada told you do not understand. There is subtle contamination.
Just like we don't see covid virus running on our skin, but still we use sanitizers because there is subtle contamination.
With our eyes we cannot see, but contamination, definitely it is there.
In a similar fashion, there are very many subtle energies around us, which we do not know.
Just like he gave practical example that how allopathy does not have any clue, but he got cured out of it.
And when he went to that place, simply by visiting that place, that system, it broke down.
So thus it is a great science and I have shared in the past also many such incidents.
Another boy who was having kidney stones, simply by using some mantra the stone came out and next day report is all clear.
So like this many many sciences are there in the Vedas. Perfect sciences.
So already nature has got many many fine laws inbuilt. We have to understand and abide by those laws.
Now we are trying to add something extra in our life, which is not coming from nature.
That is not at all required. God has got perfect intelligence. He has given us perfect thing in nature.
And sometimes we call few things are not required in nature.
In our body we call some organs vestigial organs. So it is a great misunderstanding.
There is nothing called vestigial, nothing of no use.
Pituitary gland they were calling vestigial, which is a master gland of the body.
Many other glands function because of it.
Because you don't understand the function, you tell it is pituitary, it is useless.
Pituitary gland is useless. It is vestigial. Now you tell it is master gland.
Similarly, you are removing something from the body telling it has no use.
But this is not fact. We do not understand the purpose, but the purpose is there.
And the way does mention what is the purpose.
Similarly, what is the purpose of all the activities which we are doing?
The activities are not the cause of happiness or distress.
But in what way are you performing the activity?
So as we have been seeing activities for sense gratification.
They definitely result in misery.
If you do any activity to enjoy your senses, which includes the mind.
And this is all we have been trained for that is satisfying the senses.
So that definitely brings misery.
Now some people come to immature understanding.
Okay, the activities and desires bring misery. Let me have no desire.
Let me do not do any activity. So that is also not possible.
Krishna tells without activity you cannot even maintain your body.
So what kind of activity should be done?
So that is why we saw in the Bhagavad Gita.
Let us see, do the recap again before we move on to today's shlokas.
Yes.
So here Krishna is mentioning, text number 23 we saw that.
Krishna is telling,
For the sake of yajna, yajna means sacrifice and yajna also means Krishna.
Because sacrifice is ultimately meant for pleasure of Krishna.
So Krishna mentioned,
That word does not remain material.
I gave the example, the same milk which causes indigestion.
What is the remedy for milk?
The same milk is the remedy but in a transformed substance.
When milk is transformed into curd, that curd you take, that is the remedy for indigestion or any problems created by milk.
So the same milk is solving the problem in a transformed manner.
In a similar fashion, all our problems are because of actions which are done for my personal sense enjoyment and I break the laws of nature.
When the same action is done in accordance with the laws of nature for the satisfaction of Krishna, for sacrifice, for yajna,
then the same activities liberate a person from all the problems, miseries of this life and elevate him to unlimited spiritual happiness and takes him out of the cycle of birth and death.
That is why Krishna tells,
All the actions should only be done for yajna, for sacrifice.
So we are very much obliged, just like I explained you few laws of nature by practical perception.
Similarly, the Vedas mention,
A living entity is very very obliged here.
All the living entities, they want to live here so that they live in peace and the system goes on properly.
Krishna has made a wonderful arrangement.
So in this arrangement, if we take help from somebody, we are indebted to that person and we are supposed to return.
So from which all living entities do we take help here?
Many living entities are there like Deva, Devatas, although we did not see the Devatas.
But it is a fact, just like we don't see the ministers.
But because of the ministers, we have all the facilities around us, right from the computer that we are using, the electricity which is powering the computer,
and the fan that we are using, the water we have in our washrooms or in kitchen.
So behind all these arrangements, there are some ministers, the roads that we use, hospitals that we use, education that we have.
Behind everything, there is control of ministers.
Everything is being controlled.
In a similar fashion, every affair of the universe, the supply of natural ingredients, rains and grains, all these things are controlled by higher personalities.
This we are not aware.
Just like an ordinary person, an educated person cannot understand about ministers.
He thinks it is happening automatically.
Somebody comes, they make the road, they supply water.
No, nothing is automatic.
Behind the automation, there is one engineer, automation engineer.
So behind all the arrangements, there are higher personalities, Devatas.
So we are obliged to the Devatas.
We are obliged to the Rishis who have given us this wonderful knowledge to become happy.
Bhuta, Apta, we are obliged to the general living entities.
Every living entity, even plants, we are cutting the plants, but plants are responsible for giving us oxygen.
Without that, we cannot live.
Plants are responsible for holding the water table.
Similarly, many other living entities, as small as insects, they play a very crucial part in the ecosystem.
So we are obliged to all the living entities, general living entities.
Every living entity is playing a very crucial part in the ecosystem.
And how much obliged we are to the animals who directly feed us like cows.
They give us milk.
Mother is giving milk to the child and cow is doing the same thing.
Just like sometimes people are not raised by their biological mothers, some stepmother raises.
Is the child not supposed to give respect?
He should give respect. Why?
Because even though she has not given birth, but forced a father, forced her mother or stepmother.
So they have taken the care which a mother is supposed to take.
So a child who has been raised by any woman, he is supposed to give respect, honor of a mother to that woman.
Just like Krishna was raised by Yashoda and Nanda Maharaj.
But Krishna gave all the respects to them, even though they were not biological parents.
In a similar fashion, this Vedic culture is so nice and we are taught so much to remain obliged.
Just like you're obliged to your mother because mother feeds you, the cow is also feeding you with milk.
So what is this culture that you take milk and when the cow is no longer giving milk, you are killing that cow.
So people do not have any sentiments left.
What is today's civilization?
The same animal is feeding you, it is giving you milk.
How much respect you should have?
So that is why in the Vedas, there is a concept of seven mothers.
I will explain some other time.
So in short, the understanding is we are obliged to the animals, to general living entities, even small insects.
Pitrana, we are obliged to the forefathers.
Because of forefathers, we are existing now here.
We have this biological body.
They maintain their family nicely.
And then we have got this wonderful body, human body, in which we can understand spiritual knowledge
and get unlimited happiness, stop our death.
This body is very valuable.
So we are obliged to our forefathers also.
Devarshi Bhutapta Niranam, Pitranaam.
Niranam means human beings.
We are obliged to all human beings also.
Because as we discussed, all the human beings are doing their duties very nicely.
Some engineer is working round the clock in Bombay High.
And then we are able to produce energy.
Similarly, somebody is working in the power station to give us light and other things, supply that to us.
Similarly, so many living entities, they are working.
Somebody is serving very nicely in the cash counter of the departmental store from where we get our grocery needs.
Similarly, there is a milkman who is giving us milk.
There are people who are cultivating farms and we are getting foodstuffs.
We are responsible to so many human beings also.
So this is Vedic culture.
It is common sense.
We are obliged to them.
So we are obliged to all these living entities.
So that is why in order to come out of this indebtedness, the service which we have taken from them,
we are also supposed to render some service, sacrifice,
do some sacrifice for the sake of all the living entities.
So that is why every living entity is supposed to do Yajna or sacrifice.
If he is not doing that, stay in Aevasaha.
He is considered thief and thief cannot be happy.
That is why Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita,
without Yajna there is no question of happiness in this life or in the next life.
Happiness is not possible because people are not doing Yajna properly.
There is so much misery.
So all the actions should only be done for Yajna, for sacrifice, for the pleasure of Krishna.
This is the Vedic understanding.
It is not being told you leave the activities, but activities should be done for Yajna.
Now what is this Yajna?
By Yajna we understand generally you ignite a fire
and then you pour some ingredients into it by chanting some mantras.
This is called Yajna.
That is one of the Yajnas, one of the many many Yajnas,
which a living entity, a human being is supposed to do.
What are those things? Let us see here.
So this was the last shloka we discussed in the previous class.
So a person who is Krishna conscious, everything is completely spiritual.
His activities are spiritual, his body is completely spiritualized,
his mind is spiritualized, his speech is spiritualized.
Entire matter he sees as spirit.
Because actually everything is spirit.
In illusion we think something is matter, another thing is spirit.
Everything is spirit because it is coming from supreme spiritual person, Krishna.
So a devotee is completely spiritualized.
He is Brahma Praviliyate, Brahma Karma Samadhinah.
But some people or rather majority of the people
they are not able to follow this kind of sacrifice
where the life is completely dedicated to Krishna.
So which actions those living entities are supposed to perform,
what do they perform, that Krishna mentions here.
So let us see first verse of today.
Lord Krishna mentions
So Krishna is mentioning.
Some yogis perfectly worship the demigods
by offering different sacrifices to them.
And some of them offer sacrifices in the fire of supreme Brahma.
So what does it mean? Let us read the Parport.
Today we will read Parport also.
If you read translation you cannot make out what is happening here.
If you read translation you cannot make out what is happening here.
That is why the Parports are very very important to give you right meaning.
As described above,
a person engaged in discharging duties in Krishna consciousness
is also called a perfect yogi or first class mystic.
So we have various yogas.
Gyan yoga, Karma yoga, Hatha yoga, Raja yoga, Ashtanga yoga, Bhakti yoga.
Among all the so many yoga systems that we have,
who is the topmost yogi?
The person in Krishna consciousness. Why?
Because what is the purpose of all yogas?
To ultimately reach Samadhi. What is Samadhi?
Constant meditation upon form of Krishna within the heart.
Rabu, why you are telling like that?
Perfect yoga means thinking about Krishna.
This is mentioned in sixth chapter.
So now we are covering fourth chapter.
We are going to finish soon.
After this, fifth and then sixth.
In the last verse of the sixth chapter, Krishna mentions,
Yoginamapi sarvesha madgaten antaratmana.
Among all the yogis, the best yogi is antaratmana.
Within himself, Shraddhavan bhajate omam.
He is always thinking of me and he is engaging in my service.
So that is why a person in Krishna consciousness is the topmost yogi
that Krishna mentioned to Arjuna.
But there are others also who perform similar sacrifices
in the worship of demigods
and still others who sacrifice to the supreme Brahm
or the impersonal feature of the supreme lord.
So there are different kinds of sacrifices in terms of different categories.
Such different categories of sacrifice by different types of performers
only superficially demarcate varieties of sacrifices.
Factual sacrifice means to satisfy the supreme lord Vishnu
who is also known as yajna.
All these different varieties of sacrifice
can be placed within two primary divisions
namely sacrifice of worldly possessions
and sacrifice in pursuit of transcendental knowledge.
So whatever various yajnas we have seen here in this verse
and we are going to see in future,
all these yajnas, yajna literal translation in English is sacrifice.
So all these sacrifices can be divided into broad categories.
One is sacrifice of worldly possessions
and another is sacrifice in pursuit of transcendental knowledge.
So many people they sacrifice their possessions
and that may not be for knowledge.
Mainly most of the people in Vedic times
they would do yajna for satisfying the demigods.
So different demigods have got particular powers
and if you want to fulfill your those desires
as we have discussed in the past also,
you want control over a big territory,
you want nice husband or wife,
you want to have lot of riches,
you want to have lot of knowledge, influence,
destroy the enemies and so various desires people have.
So different rituals are recommended for satisfaction of various devatas.
So usually those yajnas are called Karmakanda yajnas.
The Vedas divide the yajnas in three different portions.
Karmakanda, Gyanakanda and Upasana Kanda.
So Karmakanda means yajna sacrifice which is done to get some material benefit.
I am sacrificing now so that in future I may get return.
And Gyanakanda means sacrifice in pursuit of transcendental knowledge.
You are doing the yajna so that you can have transcendental knowledge, spiritual knowledge.
So when a person has sufficiently done Karmakanda yajna,
he sacrifices worldly possessions for the satisfaction of devatas
to enjoy in this life or in future life,
even after obtaining them a person is not satisfied.
And then because he is following the authorities of the Vedas,
he comes across Gyanakanda portion,
which mentions he will not be satisfied by sense enjoyment.
And he has realized that by trying to enjoy very hard by doing these yajna sacrifices.
A person is not doing yajna, he will anyway be frustrated like today's civilization,
where yajna is very very minimized.
And then they start doing sacrifices in pursuit of transcendental knowledge.
And those who are Krishna conscious, they sacrifice,
they also will sacrifice the material worldly possessions,
but everything for the satisfaction of Krishna, not for personal enjoyment.
So the yajna which we usually see there is fire lit
and people are offering some oblations for the devatas.
So this is only one kind of yajna.
And many other are there who offer sacrifices in the fire of supreme Brahma.
We are Brahma spirit soul.
Supreme Brahma means the infinite spirit.
Krishna, continuously he is emitting spiritual energy from his body.
And when people want to understand that energy,
they want to understand the spiritual domain,
then whatever sacrifice they perform in pursuit of that spiritual knowledge,
that is called offering sacrifices in the fire of supreme Brahma.
So it means some people, two categories are mentioned in this verse,
they want to enjoy material possessions, material richness, good birth.
And there are some others who are more advanced,
they want to have spiritual knowledge.
I am not this body.
So these two kinds of sacrifice are mentioned in this verse.
Which are other kinds of sacrifices?
Lord Krishna mentions.
Now here Varnashrama system is being mentioned.
So there are some students, kids who are there in the Gurukul.
What kind of yajna they can perform?
They don't have any worldly possessions.
What they can offer sacrifice?
So some of them sacrifice the hearing process.
Some of them sacrifice the hearing process and the senses in the fire of controlled mind.
Juhavati means offers, saiyam means controlled mind.
The materials are offered in the fire.
So here the fire is considered controlled mind, the analogy is given.
So the simile is given.
If you consider controlled mind as fire, then in controlled mind what you have to offer?
You have to sacrifice your hearing.
Do not hear any other worldly subject matter.
Sacrifice all your interest.
When we read newspapers, we read some novel stories.
J.K. Rowling became richer than the queen simply by selling the books, having some imaginary character.
So we are very fond of reading mundane affairs, watching a lot of news, mundane news, temporary news.
And these subject matters are Brahmachari supposed to sacrifice, give up.
And here only transcendental subject matter.
And he controls his senses also.
The senses have just like the kids now.
The parents think, oh let us give our kids all the pleasures that we were deprived of.
So invest this understanding people followed for some time that let us not make our children deprived of anything.
Let us give them whatever they want.
And now the children are depressed.
Earlier only elderly people were depressed.
The youngsters were probably depressed, but children were not depressed.
And Sigmund Freud gave a philosophy that children do not have something called super ego.
And because of this, they don't come under depression.
His philosophy got completely smashed and failed.
Children also started falling in depression.
Then people analyze why they are coming under depression because of this illusory concept of life.
You give anything that the children want.
And when the child grows up, so parents have a limitation.
You cannot fulfill all demands.
So he sees the world differently, starts feeling frustrated.
Earlier, whatever I wanted before desiring, my parents presented me with that thing.
Now, if I'm desiring something, it is not getting fulfilled.
So it becomes very anxious, agitated and depressed.
So that is why they're telling now, please learn to say no to your child.
He should understand what is the reality of this world.
Whatever you desire, things will not happen as per your your plans.
You have to learn to tolerate by failures by you have to understand desires will not be fulfilled.
So thus you keep on imagining your ways for making yourself happy, for making children happy.
But the result would be suffering.
So I was talking to another very successful person in material terms.
He's passed out of one of the ideas when they were only five ideas.
And he had a very good score, went to a very good branch.
Then he got very nicely placed in one of the biggest finance firms.
And then he was he became one of the top men in the country in India in that position.
And now also he's in very good job, very nicely placed.
And he's telling he was in stress.
So you told, why? What is the reason?
And he's very particular, very pucca.
He does his rituals very, very nicely.
And even though he's very busy, but he would come and he would do his Sandhya Vandan very, very nicely.
He has he's been doing it for last many, many years, many decades.
So even though he's very, very particular in following the rituals, the Sandhya, one other thing which a Brahmin is supposed to do.
But then he's not happy.
I don't why you are not happy.
You are having such an amazing career and you have been in one of those colleges, one of these companies,
people they aspire for after passing out from that college and all the top rankers, all India rank one, four, ten.
And these people would work in that company.
And he was leading that company.
So why? What is the reason?
So it is no problem.
I'm not able to satisfy my children.
Why you're not satisfied.
No, I thought I would send them to the best school of the country and he sent them to the best school that we have in Mumbai.
And all the super filthy rich people, they also send their children to that school.
Now, obviously, he is working class, working class.
You can never expect to be very rich.
And now the children are comparing with those standards.
Now what to do?
So those children are dissatisfied.
He thought my children would be very, very happy if I send them to the best school.
So the children are unhappy and he is also unhappy despite all the external success he has attained, whatever people think of.
So this is how if you make our plans, we'll always remain dissatisfied unless we do Yagya, we sacrifice.
So how children can be made happy?
Children will be made happy when they do this Yagya mentioned in the first two lines of the shloka.
So a person, a child, a student should be very, very alert like a crow.
You have seen very, very alert.
Always looking here and there.
He should be very, very focused like a crane.
Swami's dog, the sleep should be like that of a dog.
Always alert.
Anytime there is a knock on the door, it will start barking.
So people keep dogs for protection.
So the sleep should be like that of a dog.
Always in slight sound, you should wake up.
He should eat very, very less.
He should not live in house.
He should practice detachment living in Gurukul in jungle away from the family.
In this way, practicing detachment, controlling the senses very, very nicely eating.
When you eat less senses automatically come under control.
People do not know this science.
Sensual controls happens by controlling the tongue.
You don't speak nonsense.
Speak just about Krishna for advancement of Krishna consciousness.
Don't talk about mundane subject matters and taste only Krishna prasadam.
In this way, all the senses will come under control because control on tongue is not there.
People keep on talking unnecessarily.
Keep on tasting things which are not offered to Krishna.
So mind is disturbed.
Senses are not controlled.
So that is why Alpahari this thing is mentioned.
Simply if you regulate your eating, all the other senses will come automatically under control.
So saiyam, this control is important.
And when this control is there, the student would be very alert.
The student will be having very controlled sleep.
And Bako Dhyana will have great focus.
Now where are these things in the students?
They are most distracted.
He wants to hear some sound and he wants to have something on screen.
And then he is studying also.
Then he is sleeping gorgeously.
Whenever he finds time in odd times, then he wants to eat everything and anything that he wants.
And parents saying, oh, let me feed my child very nicely.
You are spoiling him.
You are paving the royal road for his depression, for dissatisfaction.
So the child Brahmachari is supposed to do this kind of yajna.
Shrotra and Indriyani, the most important is Shrotra, Shruti.
Here, why here?
Because books were not there.
The students were so sharp.
Simply by once hearing, they would understand the meaning also.
They would memorize also.
There is no need of many times reading Bhagavad Gita.
Arjuna once heard Bhagavad Gita, he understood.
We have to read many times and try to understand and we forget also.
They would neither forget nor they would lack the proper understanding simply by hearing.
So Shrotra is mentioned.
So now Shrotra also means reading.
So he should dedicate his life for understanding this subject matter,
spiritual subject matter, especially very, very nicely.
And if he's not having that Brahminical traits, then he can be educated in other subjects also.
Some basic spirituality is required for all.
But then if he Shatriya administrative skills, martial skills,
science of military can be taught to him.
Other things can be taught to that person basis is orientation.
And it should be taught offer the results of your work to Krishna.
And those who are the children who are showing controlled behavior, controlled mind, bright intelligence,
they should be engaged to understand Brahmavidya, the spiritual subject matter.
They should not be engaged in other work.
But whatever he is doing this, he should dedicate his life in controlled mind and hear very, very nicely from the spiritual master.
Now, when a person has crossed this Brahmacharya stage, then option is given to that student.
If you are realized, you can continue this path, which is the ultimate aim of all living entities.
Self-realization, if it is not possible.
Other sacrifice objects of senses, such as sound in the fire of sacrifice.
So some of them, the sacrifice, the hearing process itself.
They don't want to hear anything, don't want to see anything, simply spiritual subject matter.
They control the mind and senses.
Others, they sacrifice sense objects.
What does it mean?
This means grahasthas.
After student life, a person is allowed to enter into grahasthasram.
Now, what is the purpose of grahasthasram?
It is ashram. It is again spiritual life.
But if tendency of sense enjoyment is still there in the heart, it is not gone completely,
then a person is allowed to enter grahasthasram.
If tendency of enjoyment is gone, he can continue as brahmachari, neshtik brahmachari,
and may eventually take sannyas directly.
And those who cannot do that, you enter into grahasthasram.
Now you want to enjoy senses also.
So now what to do?
So enjoyment of senses is allowed by doing yajna.
You want to eat nice things, it's okay.
You offer them to Krishna.
You offer them for sacrifice and yajna shishta.
The remnants, prasadam, you take any honor.
You offer nice things to Krishna, give gulab jamun, samosa, paratha,
or whatever you want to have, offer it to Krishna.
Yajna means Krishna, or for sacrifice.
And then you take it, that becomes prasadam, and then you can honor it.
So actually you are cooking for the satisfaction of Krishna here.
Sacrifice the objects of senses, such as sound in the fire of sacrifice.
This sacrifice means sacrifice for satisfying Krishna's senses.
Indriya Agnishu.
Here for a brahmachari, saiyam agnishu, control mind is compared to fire.
For a grahasta, the fire is considered indriya senses, the senses of supreme lord.
So a grahasta should do all the activities only for the satisfaction of senses of supreme lord.
You want to enjoy music, you sing nice bhajan for the satisfaction of Krishna.
In that tune you want to compose, and then Krishna would be satisfied.
Your ears automatically will be satisfied.
So somebody may ask, no, a grahasta wants to enjoy his senses.
If he is always thinking about Krishna's senses, how can he fulfill his desire?
No, by thinking about Krishna, actually his senses would be satisfied.
Sing about Krishna, hear about Krishna.
That is why there are so many dramas.
These movies we are making now, you watch nice drama from these eyes.
But that drama is Krishna leela, Ram leela.
Krishna's senses are getting satisfied by that drama.
Those who perform, those who see, those who hear.
So you are satisfying Krishna's senses.
And when Krishna is satisfied, your senses also are getting satisfaction in these activities.
Sex pleasure, how to use that, we have that desire also.
So yes, there are rituals.
So Krishna tells, we will see that in the 10th chapter.
Dharmaviruddho bhuteshu kamo asmi bhartar sabha.
Dharmaviruddha bhuteshu kamaha.
The sex life which is not against religious principles, that is me.
I am giving that sense, sex pleasure.
So the sex life is also not banned.
But it should also be done for satisfaction of Krishna's senses.
You produce a nice devotee when you follow the rules and regulations very nicely.
When chant certain number of rounds every day, 16 rounds and then 50 rounds before conception.
So the consciousness of the child depends upon consciousness of father and mother at the time of conception.
So the child would be devotee. That is Krishna's pleasure.
So in this way, your senses are also satisfied.
That sense enjoyment is allowed.
So not like today's methods.
People are taking pills and mother is killing the child.
How horrible it is.
Mother is supposed to raise the child and mother is killing the child.
So Kaliyuga is so pathetic.
So all these things are not required.
So all these yajnas are ultimately meant to regulate our senses.
So Krishna has designed so nicely.
There is no need of artificially controlling the population by taking pills and other horrible measures.
So Krishna has arranged this format.
When you enjoy the pleasure, you have to bear child.
How many children you can raise automatically, the life would be controlled.
And there is marriage also.
So person cannot enjoy unlimitedly.
In this way he is able to control eventually the very strong force of sexual enjoyment.
Thus all the forces of the senses can be controlled.
And all the forces of senses lead to intoxication.
A person cannot understand real spiritual knowledge.
But this process of yajna is so nice.
Krishna's senses are satisfied.
Your senses are satisfied and your urges are also controlled.
And then your intelligence will start working very nicely and understand.
I am not the body.
What is the truth of life?
What is my real happiness?
So for Brahmachari, he sacrifices the sense of hearing in the fire of controlled mind.
And the Garasthas, they sacrifice sense objects in the fire of senses of Krishna.
Now there are some other people also who do different sacrifices.
Those who are interested in self-realization in terms of mind and sense control offer the functions of the senses as well as the vital force breath as oblations of controlled mind.
Let us read again.
What does it mean?
Those who are interested in Self-realization. So Brahmachari is getting trained and he is in
Grahasthashram. They may not completely understand Self-realization. There are some people who have
understood I have to do Self-realization. Gyanadipite. I want spiritual knowledge in life.
Which kind of sacrifice they would do? Sarvanindriyani karmani. In terms of mind and sense control offer
the functions of all the senses as well as the vital force as oblations into the fire of controlled
mind. What does it mean? Srila Prabhupada explains the yoga system conceived by Patanjali is referred
to herein. Yoga means you control all the activities of the senses in the fire of control mind. So
Brahmachari is supposed to control senses but mainly his work is to hear hear hear and the
yogi is supposed to control all the sensual activities and eventually he should not even
move. We have ten senses. Five objects by which you get knowledge. Gyanendriya. Five karmendriyas
by which you work. Arms, legs, your voice, vocal cords. Some people call it mouth and rectum and
the genitals. So these are various karmendriyas by which the body performs actions. So all the
sensual activity should be stopped because the mind is completely controlled. It is in Samadhi.
And the person is eventually supposed to sit in one place and he would not move at all. Slowly
slowly regulating he should forego eating, drinking, moving also. Just in one place he's
sitting you would have seen in Prabhupada's Bhagavad Gita the picture of a yogi is there.
He's sitting and some creepers are growing on his body. Just imagine how long he would have been
sitting in that place that the creepers are growing on the body and the nails have become
so long like that. So he has not moved from that place and sometime there would be ant
hills upon your body. Just imagine if ant hill has come upon your body for how many years you
would have been sitting in that place that position. So this is the rigorous process
called Ashtanga yoga. We think in our school, college or room in yoga mat along with others
or in stadium on yoga day we'll do yoga. No sir, no ma'am. It is not possible. So this Patanjali
yoga is extraordinary thing which is not meant for the people of Kali yoga. Just be there sitting
firmly. So all the sensual activity should be completely stopped. Hearing, seeing, speaking,
drinking, lying down, relaxing, walking, completely stop.
And eventually the breath is also stopped. So very very tough process.
In the Yogasutra of Patanjali the soul is called Pratyagatma and Paragatma. What does it mean?
As long as the soul is attached to sense enjoyment it is called Paragatma. The soul is subject to the
functions of 10 kinds of air at work within the body. So there are 10 kinds of air it is
mentioned in the Vedas. This is perceived through breathing system. Patanjali system of yoga
instructs one on how to control the function of the bodily's air in a technical manner so that
ultimately all the functions of air within become favorable for purifying the soul of
material attachment. Because the airs are not purified the soul feels connected to the body
materially attached. So all those airs should be purified then the soul will not feel attached
to this body and bodily enjoyment. According to this yoga system Pratyagatma is the ultimate goal.
Pratyagatma is withdrawal from the activities in matter. So the soul has been actively involved
in matter activities of matter that is completely stopped and soul relishes meditation upon the
super soul within the heart. So external activities are stopped completely, internally it becomes
active. The senses interact with the sense of just like ear for hearing, eyes for seeing,
nose for smelling, tongue for tasting, hand for touching and all of them are thus engaged in the
activities outside the self for common people. They are called the functions of Pranvayu.
Dapanvayu goes and these are some technical things Prabhupada is mentioning Vayanvayu, Samanvayu,
Udhanvayu. So ultimately all these airs should be purified and he engages all these airs for
self-realization. This is Patanjali system. It is not for some temporary stress management or other
things. It is so that person is completely detached from the bodily concept of life.
He is not at all interested in any of the external activities. Eyes are closed, hearing is closed
and the soul is meditating upon the super soul. This is sacrifice. He has sacrificed all the
activities of the senses and the breath in the fire of controlled mind.
So this is also another kind of Yajna. Just putting things in fire is not Yajna.
A person is following Ashtang yoga. He is doing Yajna of the senses. Brahmachari is doing Yajna
of hearing process. Agrasta is doing Yajna of sense objects. Like this everyone is supposed to
do Yajna. Ordinary people they are doing Yajna for pleasing the demigods and ultimately a person
surrenders completely unto Krishna. That is called the topmost yoga system, the topmost Yajna of
Upasana current. So all these things we will see, understand some more explanations and types of
Yajnas are going to come. This we will continue in the next session also. So for now let us do
the topmost Yajna. Which is topmost Yajna? Can anybody put in the chat box? We have discussed
before also. The topmost Yajna, few Yajna we have seen, few Yajna we are going to see. Which is the
topmost Yajna? I have explained couple of times. Satyam has mentioned Japa, Amol Prabhu chanting
of the holy name. Bhakti yoga, chanting Hare Krishna, chanting Rishaprabhu is right. Sandeep is correct
yes. Krishna tells, we will see in 10th chapter, Yajna Naam. So just see we have done so many Yajnas
you must be wondering, wow it would have been so nice. Will I get the power to do this Ashtanga
yoga, sit in one place and ants are eating away my body but I am not disturbed. Wow such an amazing
thing. Will I get chance to practice such yoga system? You are having a chance to practice much
higher Yajna than that. So this is also one kind of Yajna and many other Yajnas we have seen.
But the topmost Yajna, topmost sacrifice Krishna mentions is Yajna Naam. Among all the sacrifices
Yajnas, Japa Yajna Asmi, Japa Yajna chanting of the holy names. So just see what an extraordinary
process you have got. Japa Yajna we have been blessed with that chanting. So let us do this
greatest Yajna, greatest sacrifice now. So by this Yajna we advance perfectly, very quickly in
spiritual life and all the material necessities are also automatically taken care of.
