"So we discussed in the previous session about energies of the Lord. So there is nothing in this world but God and his energies, how his energies are spread in this material world. So Lord Krishna explained bhumirapo Nalovayu, kamano, budhira, vaja ahankar itiyam bihena prak Katir Ashtadha so there are two kinds of energies broadly classified of Krishna internal energy and external energy. Internal means, which is connected to Krishna external means, which is separated from Krishna. So which are the separated energies? Bhumir, Rapo, Nalovayu, kamano, Buddhir, Avacha, earth, air, water, fire, sky, mind, intelligence and false ego. So some people tell that it is classical physics. In classical physics, old physics, the world was analyzed as made up of these gross elements earth, air, water, fire, sky. But now we know things in much more details and many, many energies, actually they do not know. So that is why there is a beautiful shloka in the Bhagavatam. So the Bhagavatam that we read is having 18,000 verses. But the original Bhagavatam, this is also original. Original means how it started. It had only four verses spoken by Lord Krishna to Lord Brahma, that is called chaturchloki Bhagavatam. And then, because Lord Brahma was the most intelligent person of the universe, he was able to understand immediately by hearing four verses aham. And then, because people require more explanation, it was explained with more elaboration in the disciplic succession guru Shisha Parampara and he instructed, he explained to Narad Muni and he told vipulukuru vipulikuru means you expand further and in this way expanding, expanding. Now we had 18,000 verses spoken by Shukade Goswami, it was repeated by Sutu Goswami. And then Srila Prabhupada now has given commentary explain in this way Bhagavatam is expanding. So it spans 30 volumes now Shrimad Bhagwatam but originally it had only four verses. And one among the four verses is just like the understanding of absolute truth. Krishna is explained in those four verses. So in one verse it is explained just like the elements, gross elements, they are present grossly outside earth, air, water, fire, sky we can all perceive those things here. And all of them are present even within the atom. So although they have entered even within every atom, they maintain their individual existence. Earth has entered every atom. Does it mean Earth doesn't have separate existence? Water has entered every atom. Fire is there in every atom. We discuss nuclear energy, maybe water. They are yet to discover how water is present in the atom. But that is a fact. It is present. But at least fire we know, and space we know that atom is not solid as people would think earlier. Atom is having lot of space also. So ether is there, fire is there. Other elements can be discovered down the line if science advances. So Bhagavatam is explaining. So just like the elements, they are although present in every atom, they maintain their individual existence without although they are present within in a similar fashion. Although the Supreme Absolute Truth, the science is that God is present in every atom. He is present in under Brahmanda's universe as well as he is present in every atom paramanu chaya antarahastam. But even though he has entered every atom, you should not think God is finished. God is diffused everywhere now. He does not maintain individual existence. No, just like even the gross elements can maintain their all pervasiveness in every atom as well as they are present outside. In a similar fashion, the Absolute Truth is present within every atom as well as he maintains his individuality outside. So it is not classical physics. It is most advanced physics which physicists may discover someday that all these eight energies earth, air, water, fire, ether mind, intelligence and false ego are present within every atom also. So thus just see Bhagavatam, it is so wonderful, so scientific. In these four verses, complete signs of Absolute Truth is explained. So these elements Lord Krishna describes but are my separated energies. And there is one more energy which is present in this material world. That is why this world is called World of Duality. Duality means there is no uniformity. There is mix of matter and spirit. Whereas there is another world in which duality is not there. Only oneness is there. So Oneness does not mean only One energy is there as people mistake it. Yes. Only oneness is there. There is only energy. We also have to go and mix in that energy that Krishna has clearly refuted. As we have seen in previous and previous to previous session krishna has clearly told bina prakritirashtadha aparayamitaswanyam prakritim with dime param understand, there is one more energy of mine and that is the living entities. So living entities are Krishna's energy. Krishna's prakriti. Krishna is telling they are not me, Mama Ivansha, they are my Ansha. They are not me. So the spirit soul is also one energy of Krishna. And the spiritual world is called World of Oneness. Because there is only spirit present over there. But all these spirits maintain their individuality. Just like water appears like homogeneous mixture. But it is a mix of so many small molecules which maintain always their independent existence. The molecule. One molecule will never merge into another molecule. It will retain its individuality. But water is uniform means there is only H two O say molecule. You won't find anything else. In a similar fashion in spiritual world the World of Oneness, there is only Spirit present. All the souls, they live there in their spiritual form. And God Krishna, he is already present there in a spiritual form. Whereas in material world Lord Krishna has explained in this chapter the very confidential science. There are two energies. There is one energy which are these eight elements which is dead, which is like a machine. And the machine gets activated when the spirit soul is present when the spark enters inside. Otherwise nobody can maintain any of the material machines beginning from atom or these gross bodies, animal bodies, fishes or the universe. That also is a huge body maintained by soul of Garbadakshai Vishnu. So the entrance of spirit, soul is very, very important in the matter to keep this world activated. That is why Krishna tells there is another energy of mine and that is internal energy that is always connected to me, that is spiritual in nature, but that is covered by matter Yayedam Dhariyat Jagat, which sustains the entire world. So many times people have this question and they ask that and you also when you go out for preaching you have understood Krishna consciousness. You want to share with others. Then a question which we usually encounter is have you seen God? Or can you show me God? So people are very eager to see God. So once somebody asked Prabhupada, it was a reporter or somebody from the audience that can you show me God? So Prabhupada was always spot on. He was always giving shooting at point blank. And the other person would be completely dumbfounded. He would not speak a word. So somebody asked again Prabhupada, can you show me God? Prabhupada told, yes, I can show you. But he pointed out towards his disciples you have to become like them. Can you become then I can show you God? So people want to see God. But just like they go for a movie in that fashion very easily. Even that is not easy. You have to pay something, isn't it? So it is told that people want to go to heaven but they don't want to die. So that is not possible. If you want to enjoy the pleasures of heaven you have to go through pain of death. So we want to see God, but without any austerity, without any sacrifice, that is not possible. So people yes, have you seen God? And can you show me God? Yes, we can show you. We can show everyone. But you have to follow this method which my disciples are following. Prabhupada told you have to give up everything and then surrender completely to Krishna. And Krishna would be seen. So Srila Prabhupada explained just like there are two energies, so these are two different platforms. Gross platform, material platform and spiritual platform. They are different dimensions altogether. So although soul is present in the heart region but it is called turiya. In Bhagavatam it is mentioned turiya means it belongs to another dimension altogether. So that is why we have read in Bhagavad Gita Lord Krishna is explaining sukham atyantikam Yatat Buddhi Graham atriam Sukham atyantikam that extreme pleasure, mental pleasure, pain is higher than gross pain and pleasure and spiritual pleasure and pain is much higher. So there are different levels of pains that a living entity and pleasures experiences. We all know gross pleasures and pains, enjoyment of senses, suffering of senses is there. You eat nicely, you hear nicely, don't hear good music. It is very loud, shrill, then you get disturbed. So in this way there are gross pleasures and pains of the senses. Similarly, beyond the senses is mind, mental pleasure. You talk with some people, you exchange emotions and all these things, you read some stories, these give you mental pleasure. And similar is mental pain. Higher than that is intellectual level. So those people who are absorbed at intellectual level searching the truth, then they are not bothered with even mental pleasures or gross pleasures. That is why Brahmanas lead a very austere life. And they would go to learn Brahmacharya in the Gurukul and they would never come back to family. So there is one instance in Bhagavatam, one king was there, predecessor of Maharaj Mandhata, which we heard his name was Nabhag. So he went to the jungle to gurukul and he did not come back. So his brothers thought that he will continue as Brahmachary, Naishtik Brahmachary, and he's not going to come. But then he comes back and there is some conflict about property distribution. So they would continue. Those who are searching after Absolute Truth, they are there on intellectual platform, then they don't come on gross platform. Not very much disturbed by mental and physical things. But then there is a gross there's intellectual pain also. That is also very difficult to bear. So just like when we are solving some puzzle, we are able to understand. We are doing some research, we are able to understand, get the answer, we get happiness. So yes, I figured it out, it is very nice. And when we are not able to understand, that gives lot of pain. So the person who was supposed to be the founder of computers, who got admission into MIT straight after his I think twelveTH standard or 10th standard, he was very brilliant. So directly he became a research scholar at MIT after school. But somehow, because he was trying to simulate how the brain works and he developed the basic understanding, the loop structures, everything for computers, how the brain records the memory. He was trying to understand decipher the functioning of brain. But then he became so much disturbed by some inexplicable behavior of his guide. So he's understanding, he's not able to understand why this brain is functioning irrationally. Everything follows certain laws. How this brain has suddenly started acting in a very strange fashion. He became very depressed. He was not able to understand how this brain is functioning. And thus he started drinking heavily and eventually committed he died. So that was kind of slow suicide, if you call it. So this is called intellectual pain. Sometimes when we are not able to understand something, we become very very disturbed. So when some people who are searching Absolute Truth and they get confused by so many philosophies, they are not able tolerate the intellectual pain, then they become widest Prabhupada explains. So there is so much confusion, zero, there is nothing exists. So there is nothing in this world. Everything is illusion. They become widest. So sometimes when we are following Krishna consciousness, especially in the initial stages, it would be difficult to understand. A lot of confusion would be there. And sometimes confusion can cause a lot of internal turmoil and struggle. So we should not get carried away by such intellectual pain. Also. Just like gross pain, our devotee supposed to spiritualist is supposed to tolerate. Similarly we will see in the coming verses Lord Krishna explains transcendentalist means he is not disturbed by gross problems, mental problems or even intellectual problems. Sometimes he will be able to understand. Sometimes he will not be able to understand. But he understands. What is the use of this thing? It is only illusion. Physical pleasure, mental pleasure, intellectual pleasure as well as pain. Everything is illusion. It is only manodharma. Just like for my body. We have discussed many times sweet is very palatable. But for pig's body stool is very palatable. So it is only illusion. My body is designed to perceive sweet as good and stool as bad. Even among men we can understand. Some people don't like sweets at all. They like lot of spices and chilies. And some people like lot of sweets. They don't like spices and chilies at all. So what is pleasant? Sweet or spices and chili? No, it depends upon the body. So the pig's body is designed to relish. The crow's body is designed to relish filthy things. And a swan's body is designed to relish clear things, clean things. So what is good, what is bad? It is only illusion. Now we are perceiving it through our body. For a polar bear it is very hot in the poles. For us it is very cold. We will die. But he is feeling hot over there. So what is hot? What is cold? What is pleasure, what is pain? It is only illusion in this world. So what is the value? When I am sick, I think that the food is bitter. But that is not bitter. I am sick. So that is why just like there is no value for sensual perceptions, gross perceptions there is no value of mental perceptions also. And similarly there is no value of intellectual perception also. More so in Kalyuga. When we cannot remember what I have heard in the previous session or in the previous semester what were my courses, I don't remember. Then what is the use of intellectualizing? To find truth Prabhupada? We are hopeless to intellectually understand what is truth of life. But we have to be sincere. If we are sincere then Lord is seated in our hearts. He will guide us to perfection. So we cannot cheat Krishna. Krishna is there in the heart. He is seeing the sincerity of the person. So that is why duplicate person cannot make advancement in Krishna consciousness. Krishna sees the simplicity. It is simplicity, humility which attracts attention of Krishna towards a soul. And when Krishna is attracted by. That is why Chaitanya Mahaprabhu said pranadha p Sunichayana Taro Rivasta his person has to be humble than grass and more tolerant than tree. Amani Namanadhina giving all respect to all the living entities at all times without seeing their external behavior, appearance, anything. So in this way, when a person is giving all respect, very very friendly to all living entities and he is very very humble, then Krishna is there in the heart. He sanctions spiritual knowledge. Kiritanya Sadahari such a person can always chant Krishna's name. So the simplicity of the heart is very much required by a devotee. So intellectual level when we are having disturbance, so do not get disturbed. Understand that there is no value to this intellect which is very limited by my poor memory and otherwise also so we have to be sincere in our search of absolute truth. Understand how much we have realized now than what I was before I started Krishna consciousness. Similarly more realization will happen down the line. So have patience. So patience. That is why utsahat nishchayad hariyat patience some people are not patient and thus their spiritual life is also finished. So some people become atheist. Because today I want to understand Krishna today if I am not able to understand so this is also called Prayas. Very beautiful. It is also explained. Prayas does not only mean gross endeavor to accumulate money. So if a person is working very hard, that is all impediment in Krishna consciousness. But this hard work is not just for attaining material resources. Hard intellectual work today only I want to understand Krishna consciousness. This is also called prayas. ATAR Shri Krishna namadi nabhavat grahiya mindriya it belongs to another dimension. Just like you cannot take out the money from the mental world you cannot enjoy the sweets of your dream. You have to enter on that mental platform to relish the sense objects which are there in the mind in wakefulness. We cannot do that. That is different. Mental platform. So spiritual platform if we have to attain, then there is a science, there is a process, we have to elevate ourselves to that platform, that dimension. And then a person is able to perceive that happiness. Spiritual happiness which is beyond intellect and Krishna tells that is atyantikam. That is extreme happiness. So just like intellectual distress is greater than mental distress and gross distress similarly spiritual distress is much much more distressful than all these other and spiritual happiness is much much greater than all these other happinesses that we experience. So it is a spiritual experience that we have to realize in our human form of life. Yes Minister Dukena, when we attain that then nothing disturbs us. Life is successful then. Because a person is always absorbed on spiritual level, he does not desire any material demand. So there is no more material body given by this artificially intelligent material nature. So because there is no gross body, person goes in the world of oneness and atan dham and the soul is established in his pure state there free from the problems of birth, death, old age and disease. So Krishna is visible always in the spiritual world. Krishna is manifest in the spiritual world. Ekadesha siyagnir Jotsana Vistariniyata akadesha Agnihi just like the fire is situated in one place, but josana vistariniyata, the heat and light is there everywhere from a great distance. Also you can feel the heat and light of fire. In a similar fashion, parasy brahmana Shakti survey the Makhilam Jagat so the shakti of Krishna, it is spread everywhere. So in the material world, just like fire, you may not see fire at times directly but you can feel the heat of fire. Oh, this heat is there, means fire should be there around. In a similar fashion, krishna cannot be seen in this material world. But Krishna can be perceived. Krishna can be felt, heat can be felt just like as soon as you feel heat, you are confident. Yes, there is fire, because without fire there cannot be heat. There is smoke. As soon as you see smoke, you understand there is fire. Because without fire there is no question of smoke. In a similar fashion, so Prabhupada was know asking his disciples, playing argumentatively with his disciples that why do you believe in Krishna? Krishna consciousness? So have you seen Krishna? Why do you believe? So disciples were giving different answers. No, Krishna is in different dimension and Krishna is spiritual. We cannot see now, we have to purify the senses. So Prabhupada told that is okay, but what if that is not fact? Because you have not seen? No, no, because spiritual master is telling spiritual master, he is not different from Krishna. We have to have faith. No, spiritual master, this old man is speaking something he is not in his mind. Why you are believing the words of an old man? So then they will know. No, Guru Parampara, this knowledge without any change is coming from Krishna from the beginning who believes in Guru parampara? You believe in some parampara? So like this Prabhupada was defying all their answers. Then finally one disciple told that yes, we believe in Krishna. We have very strong faith because we can feel the presence of Krishna. So Prabhupada's eyes immediately brightened and he told yes, this is the answer. You can feel Krishna just like you can feel the heat. By feeling the heat you have strong faith there is fire. As soon as you are seeing the smoke, you have strong faith that there is fire. Without fire, heat and smoke, all these things are not possible. So Prabhupada tells savan mukhivada swayam ata Sri Krishna namadi nabhavid graham indria with our senses it is not possible with our tongue, with our ears, with our skin, it is not possible to perceive Krishna. But when we engage ourselves in the service of Krishna which begins with tongue, so it is the service attitude by which swayam ayushvuratyadha Krishna manifests himself. So Prabhupada explained that one should not be very eager to see Krishna just like a materialist is. Yes, please show me Krishna, show me Krishna. So Duryodhana also saw Krishna and many people saw Krishna when he was present here on this planet 5000 years ago. But were those people able to surrender to Krishna? Realize Krishna and some people tell no, please show me magic, I will surrender to Krishna. Krishna showed all this magic, amazing magic he was showing. He was lifting Govardhan, he was killing Kali and so many other things. Still people did not believe he is God. Some powerful Yogi, some powerful personality as people tell he's Yogeshwara and he did some yoga and then he became so powerful. Or he was a great man, some powerful man. In this way people and some people think he is magician. He showed Virat Rupa to Duryodhan also. But Duryodhan did not believe. He told some magician he's showing some magic. So Krishna showed this enormous power and people took Him just an enormously powerful person. But they did not surrender unto Him. So thus even if you see all the magic from Krishna it is not possible to surrender to Krishna. Unless Krishna reveals that he is God. Unless Krishna gives the understanding that he is God. No, Jeeva can surrender to Krishna. So it is there in the hands of Krishna to whom he is willing to reveal this knowledge. So does it mean Krishna? Sometimes he will reveal, sometimes he will not. What makes Krishna to reveal this knowledge? That is his devotional service loving devotional service. When Krishna sees our love, our sacrifice the devotees putting hard work in his service with a simple heart then Krishna reveals Himself. When that service begins with Jiva, with tongue sway, Maya, swaraktiyadha then Krishna reveals himself. So Prabhupada told one should not be very eager to see Krishna because when Krishna incarnated, many people saw Him. But very few realized. Kunti Marani was there, Pandavas were there and some other devotees they were realizing, handful of them. Bhishma was there that Krishna is supreme personality. Others, even after seeing all the magic could not surrender. Prabhupada gives another example. Just like a mango is there, by seeing mango can you relish mango? Can you understand that? Is mango real mango or not? No Jiva, when you put mango on your tongue then you realize oh, this is real mango, this is nice, this is mango only. So by a tongue you realize. So you have different senses. Why you are so much hell bent on visual sense perception only which cheat you, which make you see water in the desert. So why you are so much after visual sensation, ice cheat you many many times. So that is why how God can be realized? God is presenting here. You cannot see me in this material world, but you can feel my presence. And when a person is no more there in the material world or on the material platform. He can see also Krishna always. Just like Prahlad, Maharaj and all the other pure devotees, they told where is Krishna? Hiran kashapuas? Yes, he is there everywhere. So a pure devotee seeing Krishna everywhere, he is visible always. But for ordinary people yes, he's not visible. But yes, his presence can be felt. And how to feel his presence? So Lord Krishna is explaining here. Rasohamapsu kante prabhasmi shashi surya yoho pranavas sarva veda kep or shamrishu. I am the taste of water, the light of the sun and the moon. The syllable om in the Vedic mantras. I am the sound in ether and ability in man. So Krishna explains you cannot understand me, see me in my spiritual form. Because in the beginning stages it is not possible to perceive Krishna's presence. And although Krishna is present, he has incarnated in the form of his holy Name, in the form of deities. But that also is not appreciable. Unless a person is sufficiently advanced, he cannot relish chanting Krishna's name. He cannot stand in front of deities and have darshan. He cannot engage in Krishna's service much. So still Krishna is telling these features are present. If chanting is becoming hacknet, Prabhupada explains then by these features you can realize Krishna. Even gross materialists can perceive the light coming from sun. So Krishna is explaining the science. Just like as soon as you see light in your room now there is some light in this room. In your room it is also there, this computer on which our mobile phone we are hearing the lecture. So from where this light is coming out so a scientist knows all this energy is the energy of the sun. Actually the sun's energy is stored in the form of thermal energy or kinetic energy or solar energy which is converted into electricity and which gives us light. So as soon as you see light, you can remember the sun. Or this is sun's energy only in a similar fashion. It is Krishna's light Brahma Jyoti only which enters in this material world. It is reflected through sun and the moon. Similarly the taste, this energy in water from where it is coming, this taste is also coming from Krishna. The syllable om in the Vedic mantras that ohm is also impersonal representation of Krishna, the sound in ether. So from where this sense perception has developed in the ether, it is also because of Krishna. Because there is nothing in this world but Krishna and Krishna's energies. Energies transform from one form to another. In water you put fragrance, it becomes earth. Water transforms. So energies are transforming continuously from one form to another. So in a similar fashion Krishna is present. His energies are present in the material world. And the energies have transformed in all these ways. As taste of water, as sun, light of the sun and the moon, as the sound in ether ability in man. Any ability you see. So just like you see wonderful car, electric car you can remember the manufacturer of the car. Such a wonderful scientist. In a similar fashion, all the abilities, mental, physical abilities. Who has put in this machine, krishna has put. So by seeing any ability we see oh, such a wonderful speaker, such a wonderful dancer. Having such wonderful looks, having such amazing strength. Having such amazing capacity. Whenever we see such ability in man then we can understand. It is given by Krishna. In this way we can remember Krishna. Punyuganda prithvyamcha tejas Chasmi vibhavasa jivanam Sarvabhuteshu tapas Chasmi tapas vishu. I am the original fragrance of earth. And I am heat in fire. Whenever Punyogandha punya means good fragrance which comes out of earth. The natural fragrance of earth is very, very attractive. In rains we experience that. As soon as you have that fragrance, that smell, you understand. It is from Krishna. How wonderful he is. Such an amazing chemical combination. He has put that it smells so nicely. I am the heat in fire. I am the life of all that lives. So this body, the body of the most amazing scientist stephen Hawking or Einstein or Newton or Heisenberg, whatever, that is amazing. As long as there is spark in this body if the spark is out then the entire amazing brain and body becomes useless. That is why this life substance, consciousness is very amazing. And from where that life is coming in everything that is living Krishna is telling I am the life of all that lives. In this way we can remember Krishna. So Prabhupada told at MIT that you are very expert in all the sciences. But where is the science of the energy which is most important? Which is making this body valuable? That is a consciousness. There is no department of studying consciousness. If the consciousness is out of the body, all the sciences are failure. So whenever we see life, this consciousness we should remember Krishna. That is also coming from Krishna. The penances of all ascetics so penance. Tapasya. Voluntarily accepting discomfort is very important for Krishna consciousness. We see somebody doing rigorous tapasya. We should understand. This is also from Krishna. Bijam mam sarvabhutanam vidi parthasanatanam Buddhir buddhi mata masmi tejas tejasvina maham o son of Pritha, know that I am the original seed of all existences. The intelligence of the intelligent and the prowess of all powerful men. So the bead is so amazing. The small seed has got all the codes, all the details. How this body would develop in the womb of the mother. Or how when you put it in the earth that will develop into a wonderful tree. What would be the color, the design, the pattern of the leaves, the shape of the fruit, the taste, the texture. Everything is beautifully encoded over there. Exactly in that manner it happens. So how the seed is so wonderful. Who has put all this. Information so nicely. So such a wonderful machine. Portable machine. You install anywhere and it starts producing output. So how amazing it is small portable machines machines somebody has put wherever you want to install. You install and start taking fruits from it. So this bija is so wonderful. How did the original bija come into picture? It needs amazing intelligence to put all this coding. So Krishna tells yes, all this coding of the DNA this bija is because of me. Bijam Mam Sarvo, Bhutanam I am the original seed of all existences. So whenever we marvel seeing the seed who would have designed the original seed then we should understand. Krishna is explaining that is me. Buddhir buddhi mata Masmi. Some people are very intelligent. That intelligence is also because of me. We see intelligence of Vedas all the sages given. They have given us this wonderful knowledge from where this intelligence is coming. That is from Krishna. Tejas Tejasvina Maham. Powerful people. We see from where this strength is coming. It is from Krishna. Balam balavatam chaham kamaragavi vajitam dharma virudo Bhuteshu kamu asmi bharatar Shabha balam balavatam chaham. I am the strength of the strong, devoid of passion and desire. I am sex life Dharma Viruddo Bhuteshu which is not contrary to religious principles. O Lord of the Bharatas arjuna so I am the Kam Raghavivarjitam. I am the strength of the strong devoid of passion and desire. Prabhupada explains another place Prabhupada explains I am the strength of the strong and I am desire which is without raga. So there are two meanings which is coming out of it and both are correct. One is Balam Balvatam Chaham I am the strength of the strong devoid of karma and Raga devoid of passion and desire. So Krishna is explaining the good things only here. If somebody is using his strength in passion or to desire personal enjoyment, such kind of strength is not good. Strength should be used in the service of others. If somebody is having physical strength, intellectual strength also should be used in service of others. Monetary strength should be used in service of others. This is the version of the Vedas one's opulences. Just like the tree uses its opulences fruits in service of others so should be human beings and all the living entities. Nobody should live for his personal satisfaction. So such strength which is devoid of passion and desire, that is me. Another meaning. Prabhupada explains I am Balam Balvatam. Aham. I am the strength of the strong and I am Kama. I am the desire which is Raghavi Vajitam which is without attachment. So this thing is topic to wonder about. How is it possible that a person is having some desire without attachment? We desire something because we are attached. I desire to meet somebody because I am attached. I desire to have some gadget because I am attached to it. I want it. I desire some car because I have attachment to it. I desire some food stuff because I have attachment to it. So which kind of desire it is which is devoid of raga. So Krishna is not telling that desire should be zero. Krishna is telling desires are also from me but they should be without attachment. So this is called a Krishna conscious desire. For Krishna's service devotee can desire anything. So our devotees they desire to have a lot of money. And they desire to have crores of money. So that we can build huge temples. So that people can become Krishna conscious. Krishna can be pleased and people can come out of misery. So that we can distribute so many books and do everything. So the devotees also have material desire. They also want money. They also want industry. They also want big publishing house. They also want business. But what it is, it is for Krishna's service. So that is why sometimes people when they take to easy life. So this is not appreciated by Prabhupada. So Prabhupada told either you work full time for the mission and live by maintenance. Simple whatever the movement gives otherwise earn as much money as possible. So working hard is very much required. So work very hard, earn as much money as possible and use for Krishna. Otherwise don't earn money. Do you have no desire? Then use all your energies by continuously working for Krishna. This is called Kamaraga Vivetam. I have desire to have material resources but without attachment I am not attached to it. I want to take it so that I can offer to Krishna. Arjuna was not at all attached to kingdom. Arjuna told I can live by begging. But Arjuna fought for the kingdom so that it can be offered to Krishna. So this is very very important. Such desire is Krishna. So when we are having such desire in our life we are desiring so many things but only for the pleasure of Krishna. Then that desire is also Krishna. We are associating with Krishna as soon as we have such desires within us. And Dharma viruddo Bhuteshu kamu asmi bhartarshabha sex life which is not against the religious principles. That is also Krishna. So sex life is not bad. But sex life should be there for producing good children. So there are rules and regulations in the scriptures for producing children. So if a person follows all the rules and regulations he's confident that the progeny would be nice. He can have unlimited sex pleasure. There's no prohibition at all. And if you cannot there is no guarantee that you can produce a good Krishna conscious child. Then you should not enjoy at all. This is the principle. So sex pleasure, sex life krishna is telling that is me. But which is not contrary to religious principles. No illicit sex. Otherwise this pleasure which is so much captivating this pleasure is also created by Krishna. So in this way Krishna can be realized everywhere. In every activity you have desire. Have this desire you can realize Krishna, you see strength of a strong man. You can understand that is also from Krishna. And we see the light of sun and moon. We can understand that is also from Krishna. In this way we can always feel the presence of Krishna. So Prabhupada told one more important point, that although Krishna is present everywhere and you can associate with Krishna by seeing the light of the sun or the moon, you can associate with Krishna by hearing any sound. Because everything is Krishna's energy. Especially in big cities, if you are living in Mumbai or a lot of traffic noises there, when you hear this sound again, you can remember Krishna. So there are various ways, material ways, spiritual ways by which a person can always actually there is nothing material. Everything is spiritual spirit. When it is covered by matter, that is called material. Ultimately everything is spiritual. But still there is some difference. Krishna's presence can be more strongly felt in one way than the other way. And what is that way? That is explained in Bhagavatam. So when devotees would go out for book distribution, they would ask Prabhupada would ask them that what are you telling people when you go out for distributing books? And devotees would explain few things. So Prabhupada told no, you should tell. This beautiful verse is there in Bhagavatam. Bhagavatam sells for itself. Krishna Swadham Upagate dharma Gyana Devisah Kalawu Nashtadrisham asha Puran arkodhuno Dita krishna Sadham Krishna has gone to his own abode and Dharma Gyana. Everything has gone along with Krishna. So Krishna was taking care of Dharma and Gyna. So in kalyuga. Nashtadrisham. Asha. When people are blinded by this ignorance, so who will give them light? Who will give them knowledge? How they will feel the presence of Krishna? So the answer is puran arko adhunodah. This puran Arkha, this great puran. Srimad Bhagavatam adhuna oditaha. Recently it has risen on the horizon. So thus Bhagavatam appeared. Bhagavatam is eternal, but it appears just like the sun appears. So these 18,000 shlokas of Bhagavatam, they are eternal. The vedas give reference. These 18,000 shlokas are always existing. But they are manifest at the beginning of Kalyuga. So this is also incarnation of Krishna puran Arka. So this purana is compared to Arka sun. Just like the sun is eternal, not that new sun is taking birth every day. This Bhagavatam purana is also eternal. So this Bhagavatam has risen on the horizon, it has appeared. And this Bhagavatam, this knowledge will give people light. So just like if nobody tells you, nobody tells us that this light from tube light is coming from sun, we can never understand. So unless Krishna reveals this science in the Vedas and Bhagavad gita Bhagavatam, how somebody can associate with Krishna and understand Krishna so in this way, by always thinking Krishna, whenever we drink anything, even if somebody is a drunkard, he thinks oh, this taste is from Krishna, he'll be purified. So in this way, by always thinking Krishna 24 hours. In this way we should try to always think of Krishna. This light is from Krishna. This sound is from Krishna. This taste is from Krishna. The strength is from Krishna. This intelligence is from Krishna. My pains are also because of Krishna. So this pain is also good. My pleasure is also because of Krishna. So pleasure is also very good. So in this way by thinking of Krishna, krishna always person will become purified. And when the person is purified, he will feel the presence of Krishna. So that is why Prabhupada explains this very important. Please hear carefully. There are two conceptions, the physical conception and the vibration conception. So physical conception is temporary. The vibration conception is eternal. Just like we are enjoying or we are relishing the vibration of Krishna's teachings. So by vibration he is present. As soon as we chant Hare Krishna or chant Bhagavad gita or Bhagavat. So he is present immediately. By his vibration. He is absolute. Therefore, vibration is more important than physical presence. Please note. Therefore vibration is more important than physical presence. So thus we should not think, oh, Krishna is not present here. No, Krishna is present. Thus it is told, when a person keeps Srimad Bhagavatam, the amazing scripture in his house, his house is as purified as keeping the deities in his house as purified. That is why sometimes we do Bhagavatam installation ceremony. Also when somebody is purchasing Bhagavatam for himself, so we go, we do Kirtan, and in this way we install Srimad Bhagavatam. Bhagavatam is also incarnation. And this vibration Srimad Bhagavatam bhagavad gita. That is more important than physical presence. Because physical presence is temporary. Sometimes it is appreciable, sometimes it is not appreciable, but Vibration Krishna is always present. You can always read Bhagavad gita read Bhagavatam. Speak Bhagavatam. Always remember Bhagavad gita these instructions. So thus vibration is eternal. And there is no difference between Krishna and his vibration. This is called absolute platform. This we discussed before also. So when you put mango on your tongue, there is some feeling. But when you chant Mango, such taste will not come. But on spiritual platform, if you chant mango, the same taste of mango will come, same experience. This is the meaning of absolute platform. So the feeling which a person has by touching Krishna, seeing Krishna on spiritual platform personally, or the same feeling a person can have simply by associating with the vibration, there is no difference. So thus Prabhupada told you have faith in Krishna consciousness. Because you can feel Krishna. So simply by chanting we will feel, we will have the same emotions for Krishna. We will feel the presence of Krishna simply by chanting and hearing his name. So just like when you taste mango, you have faith. This is mango. By this presence you will develop strong faith that yes, this is right. This Krishna consciousness is right. So when you feel separation from your spiritual master. You just try to remember his words of instructions. Then you will not feel separation. You'll feel that he is with you. So as Krishna is on spiritual platform, so are all the servants of Krishna. Liberated personalities are all on absolute platform. Krishna and the spiritual master. So if somebody is feeling separation from the spiritual master, you just try to remember his words of instruction and you will feel that he is with you. So we should associate. So association with spiritual master is very very important. It is told sadhu Sangha, sadhu sarvashastra koe lavamatra. Sadhu Sangha association of Thadus is very, very important. And a person should associate as much as possible. But spiritual master is located somewhere or spiritual master is not. Sometimes people ask so Prabhupada is not present, how you will associate with him? It is told association should be there with the spiritual master. Pranipate and Sevaya service should be done to spiritual master. If he is not present in physical body, how you will do service to him? So that is why Prabhupada is explaining this thing. There are two conceptions, physical conception and vibrational conception. So we should associate by the vibration and not by the physical presence that is real association. So Prabhupada is defining also associate by the vibration and not by the physical presence that is real association. Shabdat anavriti by sound. Just like we are touching Krishna immediately by sound sound vibration. So we should give more stress on the sound vibration either of Krishna or of the spiritual master. Then we will feel happy and no separation. So Prabhupada told so we should give more stress on this sound vibration either of Krishna or of spiritual master. Sorry. So Prabhupada explained. So what is the use of physical vibration if a person does not realize the position of spiritual master? A small bug is also sitting, or mosquito is also sitting on spiritual master. But all he's doing is biting the spiritual master. So that is not association. So that is why roaming around with Sadhus, with spiritual master or sitting in front of deity of Krishna may not make us perceive the presence of Krishna as does the association with the vibration. So this vibration, sound vibration should be given more importance either of Krishna or of spiritual master. These people do not know. So that is why Neophyte thinks arche, what is that? Shloka? He thinks that my lord is just limited to the deity in the temple. That's it sabhakta Prakrita Smrita such a devotee is on the material platform. His spiritual life has not started. Who does not understand what instruction Krishna is giving in the Bhagavad Gita? Who does not understand the desire of Krishna and spiritual master. But just by worshipping the spiritual master or just in front of spiritual master's deity, he's offering flowers or to Krishna. He's offering flowers and incense and all such things. And he's very very fixed up in such deity worship sabhakta Prakrita smith with great faith. He is worshipping Krishna who is present in the temple. Such a person is on material platform unless he has learned how to associate with the sound vibration, understanding the instructions of Krishna, the desires of Krishna and fulfilling those instructions. So when disciples were very eager to give Prabhupada massage let me, Prabhupada kindly give you this. So Prabhupada told this anybody can do, but you have the ability to preach. So please go out and preach. And one disciple who was Prabhupada was very, very pleased with him. And he kind of initiated mass distribution of books. So Prabhupada would call him incarnation of book distribution. So he was giving experience. Prabhupada came to the airport and Prabhupada's meeting Prabhupada was very, very rare because 100 temples across the world for few days Prabhupada would be there. So disciples were very eager. They were dancing, jumping ecstatically. When Prabhupada landed, the whole airport was a prodious. And Prabhupada came. And then Prabhupada went. And all the devotees went along with Prabhupada in the temple to have his association. But Tripurari Maharaj, this particular devotee, he continued distributing books in the airport. He told my association with Spiritual master is in the seva is in my service. What will I do? I am not so advanced to perceive the spiritual presence of spiritual Master but the seva. I know what is desire of Prabhupada. So let me try to serve Prabhupada by associating with his vibrational presence. So Prabhupada was very much pleased when he heard this. So this is the realization physical conception, vibrational conception. So we should give more stress on the sound vibration either of Krishna or of the Spiritual master. Then we will feel happy and no separation. When Krishna departed from this world at that time, Arjuna was overwhelmed with sorrow. And he began to remember the instruction of Bhagavad Gita. You'll find in the Srimad Bhagavatam. This story is there. And when Arjuna started remembering the instructions of Bhagavad Gita, he was pacified. He immediately began to remember the teachings which were taught to him in the battlefield of Kurukshetra. And he was pacified. As soon as a person is in touch with Krishna, he's pacified. He was his constant friend. So when Krishna went to his abode, he was feeling overwhelmed. But he began to remember his teaching. So whenever we shall feel separation, the best thing is to remember the teachings. Then it will be very nice. Prabhupada explained in one lecture in Montreal, August 1968. Then Prabhupada explained krishna and his representative is the same. So as some of you may ask about Krishna, we understood that Krishna is not different from Bhagavad Gita. By reading Bhagavad Gita we can associate with Krishna. By carrying out his orders, we can associate with Krishna. What about spiritual master? Because the secret is yes, the meaning, the confidential purports. We want to understand the vedas. I've brought so many vedas puranas. I want to read. I have Bhagavad Gita I want to realize the spiritual knowledge how can I realize the secret is given in Rupanishad and other places also? Yaste deve parabhaktir a person who has parabhakti transcendental faith in Krishna. And now the bhakti which we are following is called Vedhi Bhakti. Much taste is not there. Sometimes we can have taste but we are doing it as a matter of duty even though it can be unpleasant at times that is called Vedhi following rules and regulations then it becomes raghanoga Bhakti we are still following the rules and regulations but it is very very pleasant then there is parabhakti. Parabhakti means spontaneous service. Spontaneously. Just like young man and woman are attracted to each other spontaneously, a person is attracted to Krishna. People think that is success of my life? No. Yes deva parabhakti Ryata deva tatha guru same parabakti should be experienced for guru spiritual master also yata deva tata guru tasitehi arthah to such people to such rare souls. Prakashante the Vedic purport is revealed. So unless a person is feeling spontaneous attraction for Krishna and Guru vedic purports are not revealed. So both person should surrender to guru surrender to Krishna should serve guru should serve Krishna. Should think of Krishna always should think of spiritual master also always yatha deve tatha Guru so then Krishna is present in Bhagavad Gita how do we associate with spiritual master? So Prabhupada explains krishna and his representative is the same just like Krishna can be present simultaneously in millions of places. Similarly, the spiritual master can also be present wherever the disciple wants. Spiritual master is the principle, not the body. So spiritual master is not the physical body that we see spiritual master is a principle wherever the disciple wants. Spiritual master is present by that principle of absolute platform of Absolute truth, just like a television can be seen in thousands of places by the principle of relay monitoring. So this is a principle of absolute truth, absolute life. So spiritual master also being situated on that platform, spiritual master can also be present wherever that disciple wants. So thus, if anybody asks you, Prabhupada is your spiritual master. How do you associate with him? No, he is present wherever disciple wants just like Krishna can be present in millions of places simultaneously there is no difference between me and my picture. Therefore, we should honor and keep pictures in that spirit if you throw pictures this way and that way, that is offense. The name and the picture are as good as person in the spiritual world in the material world, either picture or person everything is illusion. Next, if you ask if I am present in my picture and form yes, in form as well as in teachings to carry out the teachings of guru is more important than to worship the form but none of them should be neglected form is called vapu and teaching is called vani both should be worshipped. Vani is more important than Vapu. Then finally Prabhupada says if you try to follow my instruction you will feel that my body is in your presence always. So there is no difference between Krishna liberated personalities, their words, their instructions. So the secret of feeling the presence of Krishna the secret of feeling the presence of spiritual Master is associating with how do we feel presence? Usually we want to see a person physically be present. That is the concept in material world. But this is not spiritual truth. Spiritual truth is associating by Vani vani Seva. So spiritual personalities cannot be caught. Aurangze broke the deities. He thought I am breaking Krishna. So this is illusion. Krishna cannot be caught by your strength. Yashodamai was not able to catch Krishna. Krishna can be caught only in service spirit. So only service spirit we can feel the presence of Krishna. So that is why we should simply develop this service spirit. And in this service spirit we'll be able to associate with Krishna. And when you associate with touch Krishna, keep on touching, touching, touching. When the material Rajasthamas is this layer is very strong in our body over the heart. It may take some time, but keep on touching, touching, touching by the service spirit. And slowly the Rajasthamas will be washed away and we'll start feeling the presence of Krishna. So we should very tightly stick. If the lotus feet of spiritual master are not available, we should stick to the instructions. There is no difference between lotus feet and instructions of Krishna. So Krishna has given the instructions in Bhagavad gita satam kirtayantoma manmana. So always think of Krishna. Put Krishna's pictures everywhere. Somehow put Krishna's sound everywhere. Keep on chanting, reminding yourself to chant. Always live in the association of devotees where you can always think of Krishna. In this way we should very strictly sadhana bhakti the instructions are given. Be very very strict in following the instructions in this way very tightly. When we are holding the instructions of Krishna, we'll feel very tightly. We are holding the lotus feet of Krishna and the spiritual Master. So this is the secret of feeling the presence of Guru and Krishna. And Prabhupada tells if you very strictly follow My instructions then you will always feel my body is there in your presence. So with this we will end today's session and let us chant. Try to associate with Krishna. The main instruction of Krishna in Kaliyuga is his presence can be felt in chanting and attentively Submissively here hare Krishna Maham."