"It is a tradition that on the appearance day of the spiritual master we call it Vyas Puja Day why Vyas Puja? Because the spiritual Master is representative of Vediveyas the original spiritual Master who has given us all the Vedas who is but incarnation of Krishna, the literary incarnation. So Krishna sometimes descends personally times he invests his energy into some personalities so there are various avatars of Krishna not that there are ten Avatars Dashavataras we call it those prayers are glorifying ten specific incarnations. So you'll find details in Bhagavatam, Chaitanya, Charitamrita and some other books Prabhupada mentions. There are Purushavataras the three Vishnu's. They are called purushavataras mahavishnu shirodakshai vishnu garbo dakshai vishnu. Then there are Leela vataras. There are yugavataras. There are Manmantara vataras. There are Shaktia Veshavataras. So various kinds of incarnations are there. There are unlimited incarnations of God. But all these descriptions are given in the Vedas Shastras. So Vedvyas is one such literary incarnation. Krishna's literary potency was invested in a living entity and Maharshi Vedvyas, all his representatives who repeat his knowledge as it is with perfect realization they are to be worshipped and accepted as spiritual master. So their appearance day is also called Vyas Puja Day because they are representative of Vedavyas and the place where they sit and they give lecture, that is called Vyasasana. That place is meant for Vyasadev and his representatives. So on Vyas Puja Day we are supposed to glorify the spiritual master. We are supposed to glorify always spiritual master. We do every morning. That is why so spiritual life means everything depends upon this is a big secret which people miss, they do not know. So as far as material education is concerned, it depends upon two things our ability, our intelligence, our skills to have it and how much eager or willing we are to learn that subject. So if we have the skills, intelligence and we are willing also to learn that, then we'll be able to accomplish it. But spiritual education, qualification, skill, nothing matters in spiritual life entire advancement depends upon the spiritual master. That is why it is told in the openishads. Yes deve Parabhaktir Yata Deva Tatagura so some people who do not read the scriptures nicely deityana is one process, karma is one process and Raj Yoga hatha yoga Shtanga is one process. But Scriptures were mentioning no, if you read carefully, this Is The Version Of Scripture. Yesterday Deve parabhaktiriyata Deve Tata Guru a Person Who Is Bhakti Bhakti is Required and Bhakti for whom yesterday Deve parabhaktir spontaneous transcendental conviction he Has Got in The Supreme Lord that is called Parabakti Bhakti, which is Done Out of Spontaneous love with Complete conviction. And Yata Deve Tata Gura a Person Who has Equal Implicit faith and has Such Transcendental loving devotional service for Spiritual Master also parabhaktir Yata Deve as It is There in The God Tata Guru. Similarly, It should be There In the Guru Spiritual Master Also. So just like a person is very conscious of God. He offers respect to God, tries to engage in his service, glorify him, sing and dance in front of him. Similarly in equal proportion should be done for spiritual master also. Tata guru tasev Kathitehi artha Prakashante Mahatmana. He can understand the confidential purpose of the Vedas. Otherwise to understand vedas it is not possible. So this is very very important. Entire spiritual life depends upon the relationship with the spiritual master. So that is why a person is supposed to always glorify the spiritual master. So Prabhupada, on this specific day although every day we are supposed to do on this specific day all the disciples they glorify the spiritual master. Spiritual master trains them in the art of glorifying God and his servants. So Prabhupada wrote this very nice prayers which bhaktis Dhan Maharaj, his spiritual master liked a lot. So he wrote impersonal calamity thou hast moved. So there is a calamity which has happened of late and that is a calamity of Impersonalism. Impersonalism means there are two philosophies. Two kinds of philosophers have been existing for a long time. Although not from the beginning of creation. This other impersonal philosophy has developed off late. But then for a long time these two theories are competing theories. This Arjuna also seeks clarification from Krishna in Bhagavad Gita. Whether Impersonalism is okay, this advatwad what we call is okay or the path of devotion understanding I am different from God, that is okay. Which path is more perfect? God is formless or God has got form? So these two kind of transcendentalists have always been existing since time for a very long time. But as I told, not from the beginning. In the beginning there is always this philosophy of Achintya Baida bait which Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu has taught us. So Prabhupada glorified Bhakti Sdhan Maharaj in this way impersonal calamity thou hast moved. So as soon as a person is taught that God is impersonal, he does not have a form and there is no life. This life is all in all. Here you can enjoy, here you can watch, here you can talk, here you can see all the sensual activities are done. And after that all the senses would stop and you have to go and merge in some energy. So that is a great discouragement in spiritual life. So those people who are thoroughly frustrated, they may take to such path that anyway just like people, when they are thoroughly frustrated they want to commit suicide. Although normal people would never think of suicide which is very common norm in the society today. Because now frustration is so much. So leaving one's life is a very horrible thought. People are very fearful of doing it. But then when the life becomes so frustrating, person thinks death is better. So similarly, first of all a person tries to follow the path of sense enjoyment. Childish way less intelligent people. So they think let me see, let me taste let me do this thing. Material enjoyment. And obviously pleasure is not there. So when the pleasure is not there, then they think oh, let us shun all the material enjoyment that will give me peace. But both these categories, they are not seeking absolute truth. What is truth of life and who is God? They are not at all interested in God. They are interested in their personal enjoyment. Selfish. They are very selfish by heart. So this selfish desire less intelligent. The least intelligent people, they think in sense enjoyment. And they work very hard to get sense objects. People who are little more intelligent, but still they are called less intelligent. They think oh, not in the sense objects, but renouncing giving up sense objects, stopping all the activities of the senses will give me happiness. This is second category. And this second category of people, they do not want to take rebirth. So they want to kind of commit suicide. But they understand that if I die now, then they understand there is law of karma. I'll become ghost, life would be very horrible, I have to take another birth. There are laws of karma here and those laws of karma. So although they are not able to understand creator, but they understand these laws are there which are forcing living entity to take birth again. So these laws will keep forcing me. So I have to come out of the clutches of these laws by stopping all the material activities. So for them, understanding that there is spiritual life, it is very, very horrible to think a person can live in spiritual form. God has got a form and we will be engaged in service of God, loving service. That is very horrible because they have got very bad experience of love. Just like when people have bad experience of love for some time they don't want to marry. I don't want to marry, I want to live alone. But how long shall they live alone again? Either there is illicit relationship or they marry again. Because it is not the nature of living entity to remain alone. But for some time a living entity can think if he's frustrated I will not marry. This marriage is horrible. And they stay alone. But then ultimately they also fall for it because the living entity wants enjoyment. So just like a sick man is there, it is very beautiful. Example is given in vedas a sick man, if you tell him that you please become fit and then we will feed you very nicely once you are feding. Feeding is very horrible because when he's sick, then eating is horrible activity. All food is bitter and the person pukes by putting one morsel in the mouth. So he thinks I should not take anything at all. Eating is very bad activity. But no, for a sick man it is bad activity. But in a healthy state eating is very, very enjoyable. Similarly, here the love relationships whatever activities that we do, these are all very frustrating. In the ultimate end. There is perpetual dissatisfaction in such activities. And the complexity always keeps on increasing. Stress, anxiety always keeps on piling up. So those people who think that no relationship means bad and person means bad form is bad. So I want to merge into the absolute truth. There is no form of God. Because they don't want to accept there is form of God. Because if they accept God has got a form, we have got a form, then it is horrible. Oh my God. It means always I have to be there in relationships and do all these kinds of activities. These activities are horrible. They understand. Just like activities in this material world. We discuss in Jiggyasa Art of Happiness how these activities are actually horrible. Every activity in material world is horrible. So those people who are out of some addiction they would realize how horrible my life was when I was addicted. Many celebrities and all, somehow they are able to come out. They recollect. It was so horrible. I was addicted to movies. I was watching movies spoiling my entire day. I was addicted to drinking. I was addicted to drugs. I was addicted to smoking. How bad had become. I was addicted to prostitution. How my life was so bad and messed up. So when they come out of it, they realize, oh, it was so horrible that time. So any kind of activity in this material world is but horrible. Because it is simply addiction. Any kind of material activity and addictions entangle a person. They catch a person, force him to do the same activity. But these activities are very very frustrating. So that is why such a person does not want to believe that God has got a form and I have got a form. The soul has got a form. And always because he has got very bad experience of activities on this material platform. So that is why such people, they tell no truth means formless. Ultimately formless takes a form and he comes in the form of Rama, Krishna and various other incarnations. But in the ultimate issue, God is formless. So all these forms that we see, these forms are illusory. They tell just like in dream. We see many many forms. But all those people do not exist. And the water, the tree, the sky, the automobiles, roads, houses which you are seeing in the dream, they are but illusory. As soon as you wake up, that house, that tiger, that forest, everything will vanish. So these are all simply made of mental energy. Similarly, this philosophy says that now also you are dreaming and whatever you see around us. So this philosophy tells that you are not existing in the world. But the world is existing in your mind. So entire thing which you see around you, this is all illusion. You are seeing cities, countries, planets, this is all illusion. Personality. This is only illusion. So you have to wake up. That is called self realization. And when you wake up, then you will not find any varieties around you. You will find only energy, only consciousness. You will realize I exist. That's it. Nothing exists. So there is only one energy. We are also that energy. Just like there is a pot. Ghatakash potakash philosophy is there. So there is Akash within the pot. There is Akash outside the pot. So there is this pot only, which is the cause of which is a differentiating factor between the sky inside and outside. Ultimately sky is one. As soon as you break the pot, the sky merges into each other. In a similar fashion there is only one consciousness, one soul present everywhere in illusion. I am thinking that my soul is different. That soul is different. This is different. So this impersonal philosophy says that all of you are only one soul and all of you are God. One soul. That soul is God and that soul is formless. So because of great fear of life, of activities because they have got very bad experience of life and activities in this material world, they don't want to accept that on liberated platform there is life again. So such people tell, as you would have heard in various places the form has come out of formless. So there is this energy. That energy descends incarnates in the form of various gods which we call by different names. So we have to go and merge in energy. Merge in that God, merge in that energy. This is the philosophy. However, we'll see here very very clearly. So anybody who reads Bhagavad Gita, there won't remain any confusion for that person. So we saw in the previous class Lord Krishna mentions Prapadhyante Anya Devata. Those people who surrender to other devatas other demigods. They are less intelligent people. And then here Krishna describes there is another category of less intelligent people. Who they are. Avyaktam vyaktima panyam manyat mama buddhayaha parambhavama Jananto mama Vyam Anutam. So here it is mentioned avyaktam Yaktim apanam unintelligent. Men who know me not think that I have assumed this form and personality. Due to their small knowledge. They do not know my higher nature which is changeless and supreme abhyaktam. Vyaktim apanam avyakta means unmanifest that energy you cannot see vyaktim apanam they think I have assumed this form and personality. So who is that person? Abudhayaha Buddha means intelligent. Abu Dhaya means foolish less intelligent. So Krishna is telling those people who tell Avyaktam vyaktima pannam formless has taken the formam. They think this about me. And many people tell actually Krishna, ultimately that energy is coming in the form of Krishna. So Krishna is telling these people are abudhayaha less intelligent. So how clearly it is mentioned. So you go to various other such people impersonalists. They will tell that God is only an energy. Now you have to attach yourself to God. So meditating upon an energy. Developing attachment for energy is very difficult. That is why you can imagine various forms. You can imagine Surya, Durga, Ganesha, Shiva or Krishna, Vishnu these all various forms you can imagine whichever form you like. You want to worship that supreme energy as mother. Then you worship Durga. You want to worship supreme energy in different form. You worship Shiva or Vishnu Surya like that. So these are all imaginary forms. And once you are liberated, then you can forget these forms. Then you can forget your Guru also. So such is their philosophy. You have to become detached from everybody, all these forms also. But in the beginning it is good because attachment to formless it is difficult to practice. So attach yourself to these imaginary forms and then you forget. So all these forms are also imaginary. Just like imagined forms in the dream. Ultimately there is one that supreme energy only which is spread everywhere. So that Avyaktam unmanifest energy vyaktim it takes the form of a person who thinks like that abhuddhaya who think like that ma'am about me that this Krishna is unmanifest. He has come in the form of a personality less intelligent people speak like that. Why they speak like that? Because Param Bhavam ajananto bhav means nature. Subhav means one's own nature. To param. Bhavam. Param means transcendental nature, higher nature. Param Bhavam Ajananto did not know my higher nature. So all the living entities, they have certain nature. Their bodies, they are controlled by material laws and they take birth, they grow, they dwindle vanish. But Krishna's nature is not like that. Mama Vyam anutamam our bodies vyaya means it is perishable. And Krishna's body is Avyaya. Avyaya means which cannot perish which is eternal anutamam which is the finest. So somebody may ask how Krishna's body is non perishable. Krishna left his body here. Somebody killed Krishna and there was this hunter who shot an arrow and thus Krishna left his body. We all know that, no? So that is why we have to understand activities of Krishna through the scriptures. So in order to bewilder the people who do not want to believe in God, so Krishna does such activities. So these are very beautifully mentioned in the Bhagavatam. So Krishna has created so many bodies. All of our bodies are created by Krishna only indirectly through Brahma. Krishna does not do these pity things. So Brahma has created all our. And so when Supreme Lord is so powerful he is providing for all these machines. Why he cannot leave behind another machine? To help those people. Let those people enjoy who want to enjoy in faithlessness. So to help them enjoy in faithlessness who do not want to believe in God, krishna behaves as if he is also an ordinary man and he's dying. But we have to understand from the words of Krishna Himself does Krishna accept a material body? Here Krishna is telling no, they do not know Param Bhavamajananto and previously we have seen Krishna is telling prakritim Swamadish Thaya Sambhavami Atma Maya prakritim Swamadhish Thaya I come in my own energy my Prakriti Atma Mayaya my body is not controlled by external energy. I come in my internal energy. So here Krishna is telling mama vyayam AV Vyaya my body is non perishable. So foolish people think that Krishna also dies. Krishna is also under control of laws of nature. When that supreme truth has to come then he also comes in clutches of laws of nature. See Lord Ram Chandra is crying for his wife and all these things are happening. Lord Ram Chandra is also angry upon the ocean, swangger and lamentation these are all signs of if anybody is crying, how God can cry? Everything is in control of God. But they do not understand the Param bhavamajananto the higher nature of Krishna's activity krishna also becomes angry. Krishna also cries, krishna also feels separation. But all these activities are of higher nature. Not of lower nature. Higher nature means spiritual platform on spiritual platform, anger on spiritual platform, lamentation, sorrow these things they give you unlimited pleasure. So some people who do not understand the supreme nature of Krishna so just like two people they stop attending the classes. So one person has stopped attending classes because he has failed in the school. They have rejected him from the school. Another person has stopped attending the classes because he has got promoted. He passed all the examinations nicely. So both people stop attending. But their natures are different in a similar fashion. Although apparently at external level God is also crying. But his crying is very different from our crying. That crying is ecstasy and that is ultimate aim of spiritual life. So thus if anybody tells this philosophy and especially if they are follower of the Vedas then very clearly you can tell them. Please read this loca Abyaktam Yaktima Pannam manyat Param Bhavamajananto Mama Vyayam Anutamam so very clearly Krishna has mentioned and previously also Lord Krishna we saw he's mentioning Bhumirapo Nalovayu Kammano Buddhirevacha that these are my external energies earth, air, water, fire, sky and next loka Krishna mentions apariyamitas there is another energy which is superior to dead matter. And what is that? Jeeva Bhuta Mahabaho Yayedam DharaTe Jagad there is different energy of mine prakritim Meh Param that is my energy, that is Jeeva Bhuta that is Jiva living entity. So here Krishna is telling living entity is my energy. Krishna is not telling living entity is Me only Krishna is telling prakritim Vidhi Meh Param that is my energy. But param higher energy, superior energy and the name is Jiva living entity mama Ivancho Jiva, Loki Jeeva Bhuta Sanatanaha the living entities are always my Ansha mama Anshaha krishna is not telling living entities me myself. So thus very clearly, thoroughly, throughout the Bhagavad Gita Krishna has mentioned. But as I told, unless we take shelter a proper spiritual master, a person will miss this fine understanding of the vedas. Because somehow he does not want to accept. He's so much horrified by this forms and the activities on them. Because any activity, it simply increases your material desires. And then with increased material desire, you have to get more sense objects. For that you have to work even harder. And then when you satisfy desire further increases then you work further harder. In this way life becomes very very horrible. So it does not want to believe there is activity even after death, even after liberation no on liberated platform there should be no activity, no form, no interactions, no sense objects so thus his fear of material world is so great material activities, frustration of material world is so huge that he does not want to accept this philosophy. Then Lord Krishna mentions naham Prakasha saravasya yoga maya sama vritaha mudhoyam nabijanati loko mama jamavyayam so why they are not able to understand? So these people are called impersonalists they are also sadhus they do lot of austerity tapasya but why Krishna is not manifest? Krishna mentions here naham Prakasha Sarvasya I'm never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent for them I am covered by my eternal creative potency Yogmaya and so the deluded world knows me not, who am unborn and infallible. So if we are not able to understand God, not able to understand and see the form of God we should not be very surprised because Krishna mentions here people do not know me, I am not manifest to everybody will not be able to understand God. So Prabhupada very nicely mentions in the Purport so somebody can argue but how when Krishna is present here everybody on the planet can see him so the understanding is no not everybody on the planet was able to see Krishna. Very less people they were able to understand that Krishna is supreme personality of Godhead. Even when he was present the Pandavas were knowing, bhishma was knowing, Vidura was knowing very handful of people were knowing that Krishna is God. Now more people know that Krishna is God. So thus the supreme nature of Krishna is not manifest so they will take Krishna as an ordinary person, a powerful prince, a powerful personality so God in his original form, spiritual form and spiritual understanding that understanding that form is not revealed to everybody. That form is covered by illusory energy of Krishna. Mudo yam those who are Mudas foolish they don't understand who is a muda. So we discussed before the Jagyasa session. Muda means four kind of people don't surrender to Krishna namam dushkritano muda prapadhyante naradhamaha so muda means foolish person. Foolish means so. Foolish person is compared to an as. As works very hard for a morsel of grass. But he does not understand grass is growing on this side of the road and the other side of the road also on which I carry these tons of clothes on my back. I can simply go there and eat the grass. Why have to do all this hard work? So something which is available without hard work. A person who does lot of hard work to attain that, that is called foolishness. So those people who work very hard to enjoy the result of the activity, they are called moodhas. So Krishna is not manifest such fruity workers. And again Krishna is telling very clearly. Please read the last line. So foolish people. Muru Yam NA abhijanati did not understand me. Ajam avyayam again Krishna is mentioning avyayam avyayam I am non perishable. I am deathless. I am deathless inexhaustible still if somebody is telling that Krishna is an ordinary person then what can be done? So Krishna is declaring here avyayam, avyayam non perishable. So if Krishna left his body, somebody killed Krishna. That was simply a drama. Krishna is telling here declaring openly and ajam now. But Krishna has taken birth. Although he became eternal, he became God. So that is also an intelligence. If people tell that yes, Krishna took birth and he became powerful. Yogi. He practiced yoga, self meditation and then he became eternal. I'll also become like that. So here Krishna is telling Ajam, ajam means unborn. So this philosophy is also not right that you have taken birth and you become eternal. Krishna is unborn ajam and Krishna is avyayam inexhaustible. So there is no birth and no death of Krishna. So his birth is also a drama. His death is also a drama. Both are dramas in this world. So that is why we call that appearance and disappearance of Krishna. Krishna is present everywhere. Krishna is present in our hearts. If somebody is sincere, he'll manifest from anywhere. So we go to Vrindavan. In Vrindavan there is Radha Raman temple. Those who have not gone, please come with us or please join. We are doing trip during holy festival. So there you visit Radharaman temple. So Radharaman temple there is one of the most beautiful, very small deity of Krishna that is called Radharamanji. So that Small Deity was manifest to Gopal Bhattu goswami? He was worshipping Shalagram Shilas. Shalagram Shilas are stones found in Gandhiki river. And those stones are also Krishna's incarnation. There is no need for pranpatista. Simply you can take it out from that river and worship. So Shalagram Shila was worshipped by Sanatana by Gopal bhatta goswami. And he was lamenting that all the other Goswamis they are worshipping deities. And they are able to dress the deity. They are able to feed the deities honor, offer Bhogat with the deities, engage in their seva. But I am not able to do seva. Not able to offer dresses and other things. I cannot do so many other things which other Goswamis are doing. So this thing is source of great activity on liberated platform. Although on material platform we may feel little botheration who will go and sit in front of God and do no. Just like a person is more than willing to spend time with his object of love. So these things are very very enjoyable. So when Gopal Bharat Goswami was lamenting like that and that was the appearance day of Lord Narasing Dev. So he was meditating and singing how Lord Narsim dev. He manifested out of pillar for Prahlad Maharaj. And if Krishna can also manifest I can just worship his beautiful form and do this wonderful seva for him. And in this way he came in ecstasy and he fainted. And then when he woke up he saw one Shaligram Shila is missing. He was worshipping around eleven or twelve Shaligram Shilas like that. So one Shaligram Shila was missing and then he saw one very beautiful small deity of Krishna standing there and then he saw the back of the deity then it was the half Shaligram which was missing. Half portion was there at the back. And then deity had manifested out of Shaligram. It did not happen long, very long ago, just 400 years ago in Vrindavan so like this Krishna is there everywhere. He can manifest immediately drew Maraj was worshipping and immediately Krishna came out in front of him. So Krishna appears and Krishna disappears. So that is why it is very important to read Bhagavad Gita. People tell simply observe Krishna's activities and you will get bewildered if you observe activities of Krishna what to speak of Krishna? Even activities of Krishna's devotees also should not be just observed without Shastras vaishnavira Kriya Mudra, Vigehana Bhujaya, Vedas are telling even Vaishnavira small living entity who is a Vaishnava pure devotee of Krishna Kriya mudra their gestures, their activities vijayhana Bhujaya nobody can understand. So when activities of Vaishnavas are difficult to understand. Once Prabhupada was laughing. So disciples asked Prabhupada why you are laughing? So Prabhupada told you can never know why I'm laughing. So activities of pure devotees are on inconceivable platform, spiritual platform. Just like a child cannot understand what a scientist is doing if he imitates it will be only disastrous. In a similar fashion activities of Vaishnavas cannot be understood. So if a person is telling simply by seeing activities of God you can understand then that is ignorance not as per the Shastras. So here Krishna is telling don't see my activities. I am unborn. I did not practice yoga to become God or become powerful. I am ajam, I am unborn and I'm avyayam, I am inexhaustible. But such understanding is not revealed to mura to foolish less intelligent people. So such people may be very exalted in worldly understanding. But Krishna is telling here they are mudha and Krishna tells they are abudhaya, they are less intelligent who are telling god is impersonal, god is formless. So this is very beautiful chapter. Krishna is revealing knowledge about himself. What is God? Vedaham samatitani vartamani charjuna bhavishyani chabutani mamtu vedana Kashana vedaham samatitani. So Krishna is telling, oh, Arjuna is the supreme personality of Godhead. I know everything that has happened in the past. Atitani atit means past, vartmanani means. Present and Bhavishyani means future. All that has happened in the past, all that is happening in the present and all things that are yet to come. I know everything. I also know all living entities. Bhutani means living entities Mamtuvedanakashana but me no one knows. Because God is infinite. We are infinitesimal. Infinite decimal cannot understand the infinite. So Krishna is telling nobody knows me, Mam, Tuvedana, Kashana but I know all the living entities samathitani, Varatmanani, Bhavishyani, Bhutani, past, present, future and all the living entities I'm completely conscious of. But me no one knows. So it is impossible to understand Krishna. But yes, to that extent to which Krishna has revealed himself in the Bhagavad Gita in the Vedas to that extent we should try to understand so that we can become fixed up in devotional service. However perfectly it is not in our capacity to understand Krishna. So here Krishna is very very clearly mentioning another symptom of his transcendental nature. So if Krishna is accepted to have a mortal body then any person with a material body he is unaware of the past, he is unaware of the future. But Krishna is knowing past, present and future. That means he has got a different body, spiritual body. Nobody in material body can tell past or future. But Krishna tells. I know that very very clearly. And thus he demonstrated also in everywhere and how he was always helping the Pandavas. Anything is happening. So Karna is going to go, his body is going to get solidified. So Krishna knows future what is going to happen. So immediately went and he met Karna and he told where are you going in this naked? No, no my mother has called me, I'm going to see her told. You are such a grown up man. Aren't you ashamed in such a manner you go in front of your mother. At least wear a langot. And then when Gandhari opened her eyes then she told that she lamented why did you not come completely naked as I told you told no, Krishna told actually then she smiled. She understood that nobody can surpass Krishna's desire. Similarly so Krishna was able to tell what is going to happen in future. Immediately went to the spot and there was another instance where Duryodhani challenged Bhishma that you are not fighting carefully and you are lenient. So Bhishma is Kshatriya. He told okay, tomorrow I'll make these five arrows. So all the Pandavas will be killed. Unless of course Krishna breaks his challenge. Krishna is God if he decides who can stop. But if Krishna decides to fight unless Krishna decides to fight nobody can save the Pandavas. So he prepared five special arrows to kill the five Pandavas. Nobody can stop these arrows. So duryodhana was little apprehensive. He thought these arrows may be taken away or he may give them up or something can happen. So he told please give these arrows in my custody. I'll give it to you tomorrow again Krishna understood that what has happened. So immediately he told look this thing has happened you please go and you do this. And then Krishna knows past also. So Krishna told Arjun arjuna you know that Duryodhani promised you once. You remember. So he told you whatever you want you ask me. So he has that boon ready to give to you. So you go. Then ask these five arrows in boon from Duryodhana. And when Jarasan Bhishma was fighting with Jarasanda so nobody was knowing the secret. But Krishna was knowing the secret. That how Jarasandha is combination of two bodies and this is the only way to kill Jarasandha. And when Draupadi was in danger he knows present also. We are not aware of complete present. Maybe around us in our surroundings we can understand what is going on. But Krishna is completely aware of whatever is happening in the present anywhere. Thus when Dropadi was in danger and she was attempted to get disrobed in the assembly immediately Krishna came for help, supplied unlimited sari to Dropadi. And when Durvasamuni came and he came with 60,000 disciples and they wanted food and Dropadi had eaten that time it was not possible to produce more food. Again Krishna came for help. So Krishna is completely conscious of the present. Krishna is conscious of past. Krishna is conscious of the future also. When Krishna was hit by arrow then Krishna was aware of the past. He told no don't worry you are vali and you received the boon from me in previous life. And your dissatisfaction that I killed you by cheating. So I granted this boon. Okay you kill me next life. So thus Krishna has clearly explained this. So no ordinary person. So if Krishna has a material body that energy is there. It has accepted a material body. Then material body means forgetfulness. Nobody can tell like that. So this again proves this Loka that Krishna has got a spiritual body. So what is the reason for all these complexities, all this confusion? So Krishna mentions here. This is very very important. Please read and apply very carefully. Ichadwaisha Samuthena dwandva Mohena Bharata Saravabhutani Sam Mohammed Sarage so what is causing the illusion moha bewilderment of all the living entities that they are not able to understand God. Why only few living entities are able to understand God? What is the source of all this illusion? So this is the source. Lord Krishna is mentioning itcha. Dwesha samuthena o sion of Bharat. Arjun. O conqueror of the foe. All living entities are born into delusion overcome by the dualities of desire and hate. So this desire and hate Srila Prabhupada very nicely mentions in the small purport the real constitutional position of the living entity is that of subordination to the Supreme Lord who is pure knowledge. When one is deluded into separation from this pure knowledge he becomes controlled by illusory energy and cannot understand the supreme personality of Godhead. The illusory energy is manifested in the duality of desire and hate. Due to desire and hate the ignorant person wants to become one with the supreme Lord. And envies Krishna as the supreme personality of Godhead. So this is original desire and hate. So the living entity desires to become one with God. He wants to become God. And he does not want to serve God. He envies Krishna. Why? Krishna is supreme personality. So he hates Krishna. So this is the original cause of all illusion. So Krishna is so kind because there is no change in the spiritual world. Spiritual world means permanent world. There is permanent relationship. God is God and we are all part and parcel of God. Engage in his loving service. Father is father. Son is always son. Normally Son would like to serve the father in some circumstances. Son becomes envious of father as we discussed and throws father out of the house. So sometimes living entities like us who are in material world they become envious of God. So they don't want to accept God. They want to become God. Become one with God. So this is the desire of becoming one with God. And they hate God. This is called Itcha and dwesha desire and hate. So Krishna being very merciful he wants to bring a living entity out of this hard burning situation of desire and hate. Thus he creates an illusion. Okay? You are God. He creates a material world. He sends the living entity. You become Brahma over there. You become God there. There is no supreme person over you. So such illusion to make the living entity very happy is done by the God. So he's so kind. He always wants to see us happy in all situation. Your heart will burn seeing that somebody else is supreme God. Okay, no problem. I'll create a different world for you. And there you will not understand who is supreme Lord. You will think you only are supreme Lord. So pure devotees who are not so deluded or contaminated by desire and hate can understand that Lord Shakrishna appears by his internal potencies. But those who are deluded by duality and nessians think that the supreme personality of Goddess is created by material energies. This is their misfortune. Such deluded persons symptomatically dwell in dualities of honor and dishonor, misery and happiness, woman and man, good and bad, pleasure and pain, et cetera. Thinking this is my wife, this is my house. I am the master of this house. I am the husband of this wife. These are the dualities of delusion. Those who are so deluded by dualities are completely foolish and therefore cannot understand the supreme personality of Godhead. So anybody who is deluded by dualities, he dishonor and honor. A person desires honor. He hates dishonor. A person desires happiness. He hates misery. So desire and hate. As long as these dualities will exist a person will not be able to understand God. So that is why it is the version of all the Philosophies. Such higher highest truth may not be revealed but this truth is revealed to everybody. Please practice to remain equipoisant, honor and dishonor. Do not hate dishonor, do not like honor, do not hate material happiness. Do not hate material misery. Do not desire material happiness. Man, woman. Don't do this. Differentiation, discrimination. So man, woman, these are all bodies, spirit, soul is neither man nor woman. Good and bad. So something is good, something is bad. Pleasure and pain. So a person should rise above these dualities. He should practice not to desire good things in life, not to hate bad things in life. Not to desire pleasure, not to avoid pain. But simply try to remain focused in the service of God. And try to remain undisturbed by these dualities. The more he practices not being disturbed the less the dualities will affect him. And one fine day he will not at all be situated on the platform of duality. Then pleasure, pain, man, woman, this thing, that thing, misery, happiness, honor, dishonor, it is all the same for that man. But as long as a person is in duality he thinks this is my wife, this is house, I am the master of this house. I am husband, I am father, mother, sister, daughter. So these are all dualities. This is my sister, this is not my sister. These people are my friends, my relatives. These people are not my relatives. These are all dualities. So as long as this is my wealth, that is not my wealth. Yes, Pragu, tomorrow onwards I will think everything is my wealth. I will enjoy neighbor's wealth also. No. So the perfect understanding is everything belongs to Krishna. All well belongs to Krishna. I also belong to Krishna. So let me use everything in the service of Krishna. So a person should understand completely. These are all illusions that these people belong to me. These people do not belong to me. These are men, these are animals, this is man, this is woman, this is my house, that is not my house. No. Everything belongs to Krishna. My body, mind, intelligence and myself also understanding this fact and engaging in the service of Krishna brings us to the stage of highest pleasure. So thus it is very very clear from the shlokas of Bhagavad Gita. However, there are some shlokas which are confusing that can happen. So we should not get confused by that. And as we have discussed in the previous sessions somewhere you'll find the shlokas which mention that God has got no rupa, no form just like it is mentioned. Apani, padam, panimi's, hands, padami's, feet that God has got no hands and no feet. Apani padam but then immediately it is mentioned after that Javano Grahita. But even though he has no hands but he accepts whatever you offer. And he can run the fastest. So if he has got no legs, how he can run the fastest? If he has got no hands, how he can accept Pashyati achakshushah shanoti akaranaha he can hear without the ears, he can see without the eyes. So it means he does not have these material eyes. He doesn't have body, he doesn't have veins. What is the need of mentioning does not have veins? When you have mentioned he doesn't have a body, it means he does not have a material body. So veins, arteries are present in our material body which are imitation. Just like in a robot, there would be titanium chips and all those things which are not present in human beings. Externally appearing a robot's body and our body may look the same, but internally there is lot of difference. In a similar fashion externally Krishna's body and our body appears the same, but internally there is not a difference. Krishna's body same inside outside NA Ishwari vidyate kwachit dehi they have a behedo yam there is no difference between body and soul of Krishna. So for us, body means these organs, this machine which imitates spiritual body. So thus it is mentioned akaya he does not have a material body and he does not have veins. But he does not have veins means he has a body which doesn't have veins. So if somebody can see, it means he has got some kind of capacity to see. Although he may not have these material desires, what we call eyes. So Krishna has a body and it is told Angani yasyasakalendria Vritti Manti so Krishna's appearance is like this. He has got appearance. There are two eyes, eyes like structure. These devices which we have. But Krishna's vision is not limited by those structures. Angani yes, krishna can see from his ears, krishna can see from his hairs. Krishna can see from his fingers. So every limb of the body can perform the action of any other limb. And that is true for us also the spirit, soul. This is the nature of spirit. So thus it is very important that we understand in proper parampara there are shlokas in the vedas. We'll keep on discussing it further. And vedas mentioned nitya nityanam chaitanas Chaitanam Ekoyo bahunam vidhati Kaman nitya nityanam there is one eternal entity and there are many eternal living entities. Chaitana Chaitana Nam there is one conscious being Chaitana nam and there are many many other conscious beings. So what is the difference between the two? Ekahaya bahunam vidadhati Kaman that absolute truth is one. God is one who is with the Dhati Kaman who is fulfilling desires of all the unlimited chaitanas small conscious entities. So very clearly this duality is mentioned in the Vedas that I am different and living entities are different. So if you read Vedas very carefully in the upanishas in the Vedas and Hiran Mayayana pathrena that your face is covered by this dazzling effulgence satya Dharmaya Darshanaya so to fulfill the vision of your devotees satya Dharmaya the devotees please lift hiran Mayana pathrina lift this golden effulgence by which your face is covered apahinoti mukham. Your face is covered by this dazzling effulgence. So please remove this curtain. So like this Vedas mentioned very very clearly this absolute truth has got a face. And as we discussed direct meaning of the Vedas should be taken. If you start taking indirect meaning then what is the use of such reading the Vedas? Because 100 people will take 100 meaning out of Vedas, what is the correct meaning? So because Vedas are evidence the direct meaning should be taken from the Vedas interpretations. It is foolishness. So it is very evident from Bhagavad Gita. Very very evident from the Vedas and very very evident from common sense. Also. If the creation has got a form then the creator should have a form. Because we see that this creation has got a design and very complex design. So unless the creator is a conscious person and he has got a form there is concept of form how he can impart form in the creation. So all these things may be very difficult for a non devotee to understand. So that is why by chanting Hare Krishna Mahamantra, engaging in the devotional service all these truths are gradually revealed. So this is a great calamity because there is no understanding. God is some form, some energy. Then who is interested in energy? But now we understand God has got a form. Tad dhamam paramam mama. I have got a planet. Krishna is telling. I have got dham Natad bhasyat suryo nashashanko NA pavakah and that is self effulgent Dham. Person who comes here, he doesn't have to take any more births. So this is a great hope for spiritual life. There is a place where I can live, I can enjoy. But there is no death. There is no old age, there is no disease. There are people, there are relationships, there are unlimited enjoyment. So then a person is hopeful. Oh, life is very nice after death. It will not be over. I can still see, I can still walk, I can talk, I can taste, I can enjoy without fatigue, without death. So thus this impersonal understanding is calamity. And bhaktis Dhan Maharaj was very much pleased when he heard these prayers. By Prabhupada impersonal calamity thou hast moved. So we have to understand god is a person and God lives in a planet. And the ultimate aim of life is transfer ourselves to that planet. So more we will discuss in the next class. Now let us follow the process by which we can understand these truths very very easily. And that is chanting and hearing the Hare Krishna Mahamantra."
