"So we understood how Lord Krishna is defining various people who are less intelligent. They begin from the atheistic materialists hedonistic followers of sense enjoyment and then it grows up to even worshipper of demigods. We understood how even worshipping demigods does not give a person any special advantage, but one that is having faith in the vedas us. If a person is not having faith in the vedas, then a person who is atheist or a person who is worshipper of demigods, various Gods and Goddesses, apart from the supreme Personality of Godhead, they are all different forms of illusion. So called good illusion, so called bad illusion. But demigod worshipper because he has faith in vedas. One day he'll come to the understanding of devotional service to Krishna, the vedanta Bhagavatam. Otherwise it is all waste of time till the person comes to that point. That is what Lord Krishna explained in verses 2021 22 and 23. Then Lord Krishna also explained in the previous session we discussed Avyaktam Yaktima Pannam manyatam abudhayaha. So very clearly Lord Krishna told Avyaktam Yaktima Pannam unmanifest has taken formless, takes a form. Manyatimam people, those who think like this of me abudhaya, they are also less intelligent. So we should be very careful of this Impersonalism. This has created a havoc in spiritual life. So who will take interest? That okay, let me go and merge in some energy and let me commit. It is another kind of suicide. I don't want to see, don't want to interact, don't want to have any more life. Just want to go and merge in the light coming out from God. Or they don't have any understanding. They think light itself is the origin of all forms. So such an understanding creates calamity in spiritual life. And it's a very great discouragement. So a person thinks, so what is the use of this life? Unless he is very thoroughly frustrated from the material life. A person will not take to such spiritual process of suicide. There is no life. But if somebody tells oh, spiritual life means live in comfortably, nice house, enjoying all day with Krishna, without any fatigue, without diseases, without death, complete enjoyment, entire day living with God. Oh, that is very nice. But this understanding is not given. We are all working for promotion, for better comforts of life. But we do not know the best comforts are available where Krishna lives. Tad dhamam paramam mama maupetiya tukante dukhala mashashvatam NA apnuvanti. Mahatmanaha Krishna is giving solution to the problems. Come to me. Live with me. But this understanding is not accessible to people or not given to people. So Krishna is telling that please follow me and come to me and your life would be success. But we are doing just the opposite. So God is telling, do not have material desires. We increase our material desires in life. Today I desire X thing, tomorrow I want X plus two, then X plus ten, x plus thousand. God tells us to do tapasya. Human life is meant only for doing tapasya. We want to reduce tapasia. I want to increase luxuries of my life. Krishna is telling no meat eating, no animal killing intoxication, gambling, illicit sex and we have made the foundation of our life. Without eating meat, there is no life. Without intoxication, there is no life it. So somebody did a survey that what people pick up the most when they come to IITs in our country in first year. What is the thing that all of them they learn? Any new thing. So they tell this is the thing which they learn that is intoxication. So this we have made foundation of our life after attaining all so called success. I want to get intoxicated. I want to kill animals, I want to hurt others. This is my enjoyment simply for satisfaction of my tongue, gambling and illicit sex. So Krishna is telling do not do these things. And we have made that as the foundation of our life. So we are very very envious. Krishna is telling surrender. We are telling no, we will not surrender. We will not follow you. So unless somebody surrenders to Krishna is willing to follow Krishna, it is not possible to have this proper understanding that God is a personality. So how long will this continue? So what is the cause of this illusion that we are unable to understand and develop faith in God that God is a person? It is very simple. God has got a planet and spiritual life. Mrity or ma amritamgame we are meant to become immortal. So what is the difficulty? What is the cause? Can somebody tell in the chat we discussed in the previous session that what is the cause? Why we are not able to understand that God is a person and we have to follow God and what this human life is meant for? Why this confusion is there of Impersonalism and so many other philosophies? Let me see who is able to answer lack of faith Yogmaya no. Oh yes. One devotee has told very perfectly enviousness with God. Yeah, exactly. More close technical words if somebody can tell delusion lack of faith in spiritual master free will. One Mataji has also told very nicely. Yes. Only ignorance. No ego no. We are envious of God. Partially correct because of our enjoyment tendency without God. No. Yes. So Darshan Prabhu and Shilpa Mataji and Hari Mohan Prabhu are the first three people to give right answers from more than 30 answers which I've received. So it is very important to hear very carefully what we are discussing. So we discussed in the previous session. Thank you so much for the answers. Yes. So the answer is ichadwesha samuthayana dwandu mohena bharata. So I'll just share very important verse. Please see again very carefully. This is the cause of our lack of understanding as Krishna, the supreme personality of Godhead. Please see the screen. Ichadwaisha samuthena Dhwandva Mohena Bharata Sarva, Bhutani sam Mohammed Sarge Yanti Parantapa all living entities are born into delusion. Overcome by the dualities of desire and hate. We are born into delusion in this ignorance because of the dualities of desire and hate. So please understand. This is one of the most fundamental principles of understanding spiritual life. Duality of desire and hate. It is completely illusion. God is telling here we are born into this illusion, born into delusion. Why this illusion is there? Because of this duality of desire and hate. So we think something is good and pleasant for us and we desire those things in life. We think, oh, money is very good for me, that will make me happy. And one good life partner lover is very important in my life. That will make me happy. Some comforts will make me happy. Some security will make me happy. And saving time from Krishna, not giving too much time to Krishna will make me happy. And like this planning for my life will make me happy. And if I follow Vedas very nicely strictly I will have any loss in life. So we hate no, no, I don't want to follow very strictly I may have some loss in life. If I surrender to Krishna, my life will become difficult. And so many other concepts we have so few things we hate. This person is not good. This kind of person I should not have. I should not have a person who is not very beautiful, not very accomplished in life with me. I should not live a life without any fame. Infamy we hate criticism, nobody should criticize us. And all these things are there which we have in our mind. So these are both illusions. Only in the association we develop such illusory conceptions in life that this thing is desirable. This thing is non desirable. This is only because of association. We have discussed numerous times before. But it is important to understand. Just like we associated with the person whom we might be mad in life after because we associated, we develop desire. Oh, I want this person. Because we associated with few people, we develop desire. I want this post, I want this position CXO or this is very nice title, I want to have it. Or so many other things a person can have. It all depends upon association. In the association we develop desires. But the same person, if he's in different association. Just like the child of devotee was there. So ordinary children, they want toys. And somebody offered a toy to the devotee child. And he's telling Maya. Maya. Maya. This is Maya. So he has been educated from the beginning, from the childhood that all these toys, objects of sense, gratification, they are illusion, they are Maya. So he's telling Maya, Maya, I do not want it. So just see same toy which is desirable for one boy, one child, it is not desirable for another. So I was discussing some time back. One of the grahasta couple they are following very nicely. They chant 16 rounds of Hari Krishna mantra. And both of them are working also. Very responsible position. Then they help us in preaching also sometimes. So I was discussing with Mataji that she was there with us for some preaching activity. So now you go back because you're not able to spend much time. So what do children they do? They don't get bored. What do they do? They watch television? No, we don't have television in our house. So they have removed it or they don't start it at all. Something like that. So this is the culture. So I told them, when you go home, what do you find your children engaged in? So she tells, so they are very nice. They are simply playing kartalidanga. They are doing bhajan. So the children are also very nice. So usually children you'll find they are busy with mobile phones or watching TV or XYZ some other games. Mundane frivolities. But here children they are practicing ridanga kartal, doing Vajan. So mother has to tell please chant less, study also nicely. They are very fond of chanting. They want to chant more and more. And when there are some international trips announced so they don't like very much these trips. They are very fond of Dhammyatra with their devotees. They want to go to Mayapur, Vrindavan, other places. So this is the desire that they have cultivated. International trip. It's not desirable for them. Not interested. And Dhamyatra? Oh, very desirable. So it all depends upon the association. So if we have right association we may have right desires which is good for us. In wrong association we come into illusion. So please understand. We have to redefine our life, our desires, desirable objects and non desirable things should be as per the association of pure devotees who are completely free from all ignorance. So please do not define your aims of life endeavors as per the current understanding that we have few desirable non desirable. We develop from previous birth pig body for pick. Clear waters are not desirable. He hates clear waters. So this is previous life's association. And something is there which we have developed in this life. But we have to understand this is all not important. As long as we are on the platform of desire and hate we will not understand true knowledge. We will not understand God. There is no chance. So then what I should desire, what I should hate I should simply desire remembrance of Krishna, service of Krishna. Any activity which is bringing me in close contact with Krishna that is desirable. And anything which is pushing me away from Krishna, that is non desirable. So if money makes me less dependent upon Krishna, this money is not desirable. And if money is making me a devotee it is helping me to engage in service of Krishna. Then money is desirable. So the same object becomes desirable or non desirable basis. Our position if I think oh, I am getting addicted to money I see my bank balance increasing and because of my greed I'm not able to engage money in service of Krishna. Better don't earn earn very less. But if I can use in the service of Krishna then that is very nice. Earn much more, desire much more money. So the same object becomes desirable or non desirable basis. Whether it is helping me to advance in Krishna consciousness or it's a hurdle. The same people around me if they are helping me to become devotees they are devotees, they are desirable. If they are taking me away from Krishna they may be very close to me, very close friends or something. XYZ they are non desirable. I'll maintain limited association with them. So thus we should redefine our desires and the things we hate. So it should be basis what is helping me come closer to Krishna or what is pushing me away from Krishna. So please do not think that some disease in life is a curse. Some loss of property in life is a curse. Some blasphemy or criticism in life is a curse. No, all these things can be very good for Krishna consciousness. A person develops detachment and he becomes very dependent on Krishna. Like Bali Maharaj. When all his property by cheating Krishna stole from Bali Maharaj then Bali Maharaj became full of gratitude. Oh Krishna, thank you so much for making me realize tempted in nature of this material world. Actually you're friend of the demons. Apparently it appears that Krishna is friend of demigods Devatas and is enemy of demons. But actually you are favoring demons because you take away our opulences. And when the opulences are taken away we realize the temporary nature of this material world. We come to reality and the demigods they get infatuated by the material opulence. So thus they go away from reality. So just see this is the understanding of devotee. If I am chanting and tomorrow I lose my job. Anything around me I lose my relative. Naradmani small boy in previous birth. So he was having nobody but only mother was there. Father there is no clue, no relatives. He was living with mother. A small boy who has no other relative he has only mother. And the mother got bitten by a snake and died. How unfortunate. And this happened after he came in touch with the pure devotees he started worshipping Krishna very nicely and he is worshipping Krishna nicely. He has got blessings of pure devotee and the result is mother is dead. So for ordinary child it is a setback and people would tell in today's parlance materialists will tell unfortunate child and somebody should take care of the child. And like that very unfortunate. But Narad Muni then when this incident happened because by mercy of pure devotees he understood knowledge of Krishna absolute truth. So he thanked Krishna for this incident that Krishna is so merciful. Only one impediment was there in my life. This was my attachment. Greatest attachment. So Krishna very mercifully. He has removed the attachment. So just see a small voice offering gratitude to Krishna on the death of mother. Similar thing was experienced by Parikshit Maharaj. Seven days he is about to die and he's a pure devotee of Krishna and he doesn't desire anything else. But then he gets the curse to die in seven days for no fault of him. His heart becomes full of gratitude. Krishna, thank you so much. And I was getting attached to my material opulence and my relatives. So thank you very much for cutting it down by your mercy. So this is the vision of devotee apparent reversals in life. If they are helpful in Krishna consciousness and actually devotee can use any situation to advance in Krishna consciousness. So thus when a person understands this thing, just imagine how much freedom he is there he's having in life. Then no botheration. He will put regulated endeavor because it is not practical obviously for most of the people to leave. Whatever we have our industry, we have our business, we have our occupation, remain engaged in that. Krishna also is not telling for general masses to leave but offer the results to Krishna. So there is no difficulty at all. So any situation he can use for advancing in Krishna consciousness he should just make sure he is following regulations of Krishna consciousness very very nicely. So we should come out of this platform. This thing is desirable. This thing is non desirable. No, anything non desirable by my mind and body is also desired by me if it helps me to come closer to Krishna. And anything which is pleasing to my mind and body is non desirable by me. I hate it if it takes me away from Krishna. This is called absolute platform. So how is it possible? So prabhu we understood the theory. It is all very good to hear, but how to understand? I'm sorry. So that is why Lord Krishna explains. Here we'll see the next Shloka first verse of today very important Shloka. Please read carefully. Ye Sham Twantagatam Papam Janan Punya Karmanam Tedvanvamoha Nirmukta Bhajante Madrid so now here Krishna is telling when is it possible to come out of this platform of duality to become free from the clutches of desire and hate? So this is the answer Lord Krishna gives. So very beautiful is Bhagavad gita. Everything is mentioned. Ye Sham to antagatam Papamtu means but persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life Janam Punya Karmanam whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of delusion engage themselves in my service with determination. So who can engage in this knowledge of absolute truth? First of all, it is mentioned only those who have passed their lives in practicing regulative principles of religion who have acted piously. So this is very very important. Those who are sinful, atheistic, foolish, deceitful it is very difficult to transcend duality of desire and hate. An atheistic person will never be able to come out of desire and hate. Always he will remain in illusion and helplessly material nature will force him. Material nature will create something desirable object and then force such a person to remain anxious when will I get the object? And then if he does not get the object, he's anyway frustrated. If he gets the object, he's fearful how will I retain it and ultimately loses it only to lament. So atheist, sinful, foolish. So that is why intelligent human body is very very rare. Krishna consciousness is meant only for the intelligent people. So foolish. A person who is very foolish and deceitful heart is not pure, so it is duplicate. Sitter's. Heart is not good. Such a person cannot make. A person should be very simple hearted. Only he can understand knowledge, become devotee sinful, atheistic, foolish, deceitful. It is very difficult to transcend duality of desire and hate. Only those who have passed their lives in practicing regulative principles of religion. That is why so many regulations are there. In religion all these regulations are there. So that person can rise above this duality of desire and hate. So who have acted piously and who have conquered sinful reactions can accept devotional service. So unless somebody has conquered the sinful reactions of the past he cannot accept devotional service also. So first of all we have to act very very piously and we have to conquer the sinful reactions of the past. Past. We have broken many laws of nature and some reactions are awaiting us. Unless we are free from the reactions of past sinful life it is not possible to accept devotional service. Right logic, right revelation, understanding will not be given to us. And when a person is free from the sinful reactions of past life in this life now I'm not committing any more sins, acting very piously. And I have accepted now by virtue of it the principles of devotional service. Then such people gradually rise to pure knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Gradually it will happen just like gradually we learn any subject, sciences, humanities, anything. Gradually we advance in knowledge. So first of all life should be very pure. I should be following Bhagavad Gita very very nicely. All the rules and regulations stop acting sinfully, meat eating intoxication, gambling, illicit sex should be mental, speculation should be strictly stopped. And then gradually a person will advance to the pure knowledge of Supreme Personality of Godhead. And then what will happen? Then gradually when he is rising to the platform of pure knowledge, then again gradually they can meditate entrance on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So now when we go and we watch the deities in the temple or we hear the Hare Krishna Mahamantra, we are not able to do so with absorption so it is not possible to absorb ourselves in beholding the deities. That is why people come to temple. Sometimes the devotees of boys who are staying in with us or sometimes they tell their friends. So where have you been this weekend? No, I went to temple or temple. But 4 hours you were not there. Yes, 4 hours. 4 hours in the temple. What are you doing? Temple means you go, you ring the bell and then you offer some namaste and come out. 4 hours. What a person can do in temple so they cannot understand. So unless somebody is sufficiently advanced he cannot relish holy names of Kirtana beholding the deities krishna Katha so what is required is meditation entrance. A person should be completely absorbed in such meditation. So this is also possible gradually first freedom from sinful life then rise to platform of pure knowledge. And then when a person has risen to the platform of pure knowledge knowledge is very much important. Then meditation is possible. So without knowledge meditation is not possible. This is the process that is called spiritual platform. When a person is always then you will understand what is spiritual pleasure? What is spiritual life. When a person is absorbed entrance in meditating upon Krishna that is the process of being situated on the spiritual platform. Where a person does not forget Krishna. This elevation is possible in Krishna consciousness. Now how is it possible? You should ask if I have broken some laws of nature then any laws I break there is no rescue. I have to suffer from the reaction. How can I do nice activity? How can I follow principles of religion? So then Prabhupada explains very simply. So here Krishna has mentioned you have to do all these things. But how these things will be possible? This is not mentioned in this verse. So that is why we require acharyas very nicely. Krishna will gradually reveal it. But Prabhupada is revealing immediately what Krishna is going to reveal later down the line. So here Prabhupada is revealing. This elevation is possible in Krishna consciousness. In the association of pure devotees who can deliver one from delusion. So association of which kind of devotee? Not neophyte, not mixed devotee but association of pure devotees is required who are completely surrendered to Krishna. So only in such association this elevation what we have discussed acting piously, not acting impiously, rising to the platform of knowledge and then meditation entrance. This elevation is possible only in the association of pure devotees. So thus it is stated in Srimad Bhagavatam Satam Prasangat Mamaviriya Samvido only in the association of devotees can a person understand the message of Krishna. Mahasevam dwaram Ahur vimukte tamo dhwaram yoshitam sanghi sangam if one actually wants to be liberated Prabhupada is writing in English the same shloka. He must render service to the devotees. Mahasevam Dwaram Ahur Vimukte so we are doing service to so many people. We are serving our boss. We are serving our customers. But if we are able to serve pure devotees, then such elevation is possible. But one who associates with materialistic people, tamo Dhwaram Yoshitam Sanghi Sangam he is on the path leading to darkest region of existence. So good association is desirable and bad association of the materialists who have no understanding of spiritual life, that is very very dangerous. That opens the path of darkest region. Very hellish situations of life. So now let us understand the practical implementation of this knowledge and the power of the association of devotees. And that is what we wrote in the title also. It's a very very important instance. Usually a person should engage himself in service of Krishna in full knowledge, engage in devotional service in satvoguna. If without knowledge a person is engaging, then spiritual advancement is not made. But a person comes closer to spiritual advancement, he gets more chances of spiritual encounters. However, even devotional service done in ignorance in the association of devotee, if the devotee is pleased, it also becomes immensely powerful. That is what happened in the case of one simple street dog. So this instance is from Chaitanya Charitamrita. So this is the story when Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu it is mentioned in the Antelila. Chaitanya Charitamrita has three sections. The last section is called Antelila. The final pastimes of Lord Chaitanya. So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, he went to South India Tour and then he went to Vrindavan. Then he returned from Vrindavan to Jagannathpuri which was the main place of his day after Sanyas. So when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu came to Jagannathpuri, Sarub Damodar Goswami, he was his assistant. He was also a sannyasi and incarnation of Lalita Sakhi. He was the most confidential associate. Knowing the mind of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, it is told he was second form of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. So Sarub Dhamodar Goswami was waiting back in Jagannath Puri for Mahaprabhu's return. And when Mahaprabhu returned, he immediately sent news of the Lord's arrival to devotees in Bengal. So Mahaprabhu was born in Bengal. So all the pure devotees were very eager. So in Rathyatra time, all the devotees from Bengal, Navadv, Mayapura, around Kolkata, that place they would come travel to Jagannath Puri and in Chatur Mahasya, when it rains heavily, they would all stay in Jagannath Puri and take association of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. And then they would return back after four months. So the four months of Chaturamasya now the reigns are going to start in some time. They are only meant for austerities, rigorous tapasya and spiritual advancement in the Vedic culture. So he told that Chaitanya Mahaprabhu has come. You all can please arrive. So upon hearing this news, mother Shachi and all other devotees of NAV mother Shachi is mother of Lord Chaitanya. They became very joyful and they all departed together for Neelachal, another name for Jagannath Puri. Thus all the devotees of Kulina Gram, one village which was full of devotees and Sri Khanda as well as Advaita Charia, they came together to meet Sivanand sen. So Shivanandsen Prabhu was the trip organizer. He was very expert. He was knowing the ways, the paths, how to travel. He was knowing how to give the tolls. There was checkposts and tolls in between on the roads and he was arranging for the prasadam for accommodation. So he was trip organizer for them. So they all came together to meet Shivanansain. Shivanansain arranged for the journey. He maintained everyone and provided residential quarters. While going to Jagannath Puri, Shivanansain allowed a dog to go with him. He supplied it the food to eat and maintained it. One day when they needed to cross a river, an urisan boatman would not allow the dog to get in the boat. Shivanansayan, unhappy that the dog had to stay behind, paid the boatman ten pana of conscious to take. It was some currency of 500 years ago in Bengal. He paid boatman ten pana of conscious to take the dog across the river. So he had to give extra money so that he can allow dog. One day while Shivanansain was detained by a tollman his servant forgot to give dog its cooked rice. At night, when Shivananse returned and was taking his meal he inquired from the servant whether the dog has gotten its meals. When he learned that the dog has not been supplied food in his absence he was very unhappy. He then immediately sent ten men to find the dog. When the men returned without success, Shivan unseen became very unhappy and fasted for the night. So just see, this is the compassion of pure devotee. So the dog was not fed. So Shivanansain fasted I will also not eat. You did not take care of that living entity. In the morning they looked for the dog but it could not be found anywhere. And all the Vaishnavas were astonished. That where dog has gone nowhere in the vicinity he was there. Usually dogs don't leave like that. So here Prabhupada explains shivan Sen's attachment to the dog was a great boon for that animal. The dog appears to have been a street dog since it naturally began to follow Shivanand sen while he was going to Jagannath Puri with his party, he accepted it into his party and maintained it the same way he was maintaining other devotees. It appears that although on one occasion the dog was not allowed aboard the boat, shivanand did not leave the dog behind but paid more money just to induce the boatman to take the dog across the river. Then when the servant forgot to feed the dog and dog disappeared, shivanand, being very anxious, sent ten men to find it. When they could not find it, Shivananda observed a fast. Thus it appears that somehow or other Shivanand had become attached to the dog. So we may wonder that Shivanan Sane, we are telling he's a pure devotee. He was organizing tour of all the pure devotees and he's getting attached to dog. We are not. Supposed to get attached to even other human beings. So what is the reason for this attachment? So thus as we discussed in the last class vaishnavira Kriya Mudra, Vijayhana Bujaya we should not try to figure out and fathom the external activities of the devotee. So the devotees, pure devotees are on a totally different platform. So Shivanand Singh somehow what is a consciousness? Prabhupada has not ventured out to explain but there could be various reasons. Sivanand Singh could have seen dog as a devotee who is willing to have darshan of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Because nothing happens without Krishna's Sanction who is sitting in the heart. Krishna sitting in the heart protects the sannyasis in the jungle from attack of wild animals. Similarly this animal also has been dictated by the Parmatma. So thus it is not ordinary. He would have taken duty that now I have to take this dog on Sankirtan to Jagannathpuri to meet Ma. Or it could be some any other reason. They see past, present, future, everything. But somehow or the other. So for ordinary people this attachment is very bad. If you get attached to Dog and you think of Dog just like Bharat Maharaj, he got attached to deer and he had to become deer in the next life. So if somebody is attached to dog, he'll take dog's body in the next life. But Shivanand Singh, it is written here his attachment to the dog was a great boon for that animal. So thus if the devotee, pure devotee becomes attracted attached to somebody so then that is very great advantage. It is told Tejiya Samna Doshaya, those people who are very powerful there is no fault in any activity of theirs. For us saving a person is good and killing a person is bad. But for a pure devotee or Krishna saving is also good. Killing is also good. Thus all the people who were killed by Krishna, they immediately got liberated. Freedom from birth and death position which is very difficult to attain even by the Yogis Narad Muni when he curses ordinary when you curse somebody then that is when you punish somebody that is harmful for that person and for yourself also you also degrade in spiritual life. But Narad Muni, when he curses, when he cursed Nalku or Mani greeve they became liberated pure devotees of Krishna. So thus pure devotees, whatever activity they do apparently they may show anger, they may kill or they may save. Everything is for the benefit of the other living entity. So the Shivan Sain when he's getting attached to the dog. So then Dog got immense benefit by that attachment. So that is why we should not imitate the activities of pure devotee but follow their instructions. Are they telling us also to get attached like that? But Shivanand says this advantage somehow or the other a pure devotee becomes attached. That is a great benefit. So Prabhupada explains as it will be evident from the following verses the dog got the mercy of Sri Chattana Mahaprabhu and was immediately promoted to Vaakuntha to become an eternal devotee. Srila Bhakti bhanodhakur has therefore sung so we have got various aspirations in life. I want to wear suit, tie, white collar, job, business, this degree, that degree and this house, that palace, penthouse, I want. But Bhakti Vinod Thakur person who was most successful in the time of Britishers, he was such a successful magistrate that just to facilitate his attending the office, railway track was laid down till front of his house. Can you imagine? He was so very much efficient that it is told Britishers employed some 40 people. If I am not recollecting wrongly, they employed 40 or 80 people. If I'm not wrong, they also could not do the work Bhaktivinotakur was doing. Such a wonderful personality. So British has told no, we want this person. So just to facilitate him, railway track was laid down. So when you come with us to Mayapur Trip, we'll show you how outside Bhakti Vinod Thakur the train would come so that he can reach office very nicely easily. So he was magistrate, the highest position acquired by any Indian in the British era. But what is Bhakti vinod Thakur's desire. He has sung in the Vaishnava song. Tumita thakur tomar Kukur, Baliya, jana Hamuri that tumita thakur you are vaishnav thakur you are my lord. Tomar Kukur, Baliya, jana Hamuri He offers to become the dog of a Vaishnava. Tomar Kukura. Kukura means dog. So thus pure devotees understand what is the position of becoming even a dog of a Vaishnava. So thus he is aspiring that I am your dog, please accept me as your dog. Thus he offers to become a dog of the Vaishnava. There are many other instances in which the pet animal of ava was delivered back home, back to Vakunthaloka, back to Godhead. Such is the benefit of somehow or other becoming the favorite of a Vaishnava. So somehow or the other, if we are able to become favorite of a Vaishnava, this is the result. So ordinarily human life is required. In human life also a person has to cultivate so much. Tapasya Satyam Shamadama titiksha Shanti Rajavam Jnanam Vijna mastikyam Brahma karma Sabhajam So he has to become pure devotee, render rigorous service. But here, simply by becoming animal, that success is trained. Such is the benefit of somehow or other becoming the favorite of a Vaishnava. Srila Bhaktivevanuthur has also sung there is no harm in taking birth. Again and again people think, oh, I want Moksha, I don't want to take birth. But there is no harm. Bhaktivanuthakur is telling our only desire should be to take birth under the care of a Vaishnava. If we are under the care of Vaishnava, there is no difficulty in life. Thus in Narayan Vihustava it is mentioned naham Brahma Pibhuyasam I don't want to become Brahma. Brahma, who is the creator, secondary creator of this entire universe who has created all the bodies of all the living entities. He has created all the planets and everything that we see. So I don't want to become Brahma bhakti Rahito Hare who is devoid of devotional service unto you and Twai bhaktas to Keto API. The Vedas are mentioning Twai bhaktas to ketoapi. Even if I take birth as a keeta as a worm but Twai bhakta in the house of a devotee I prefer that birth bhuyasam. Janma janmasu. Let me take many, many births as an insect in the house of devotee rather than a brahma who is a materialist who is not a devotee. So thus we may conclude everyone should take even as dogs we must take shelter of Vaishnava and the benefit Prabhupada mentions will be the same as that which accrues to an advanced devotee under the Vaishnava scare. So then further it is told in Chetan and Charitamrita when they did not find the dog around, in great anxiety they all walked to Jagannath Puri where Sri Chathana Mahaprabhu met them. As usual sri Chathana Mahaprabhu went with them to see the Lord in the temple lord jagannath. And on that day he also took lunch in the company of all those devotees. As previously. The Lord provided them with all residential quarters. And the next morning all the devotees came to see the Lord. When all the devotees came to the palace of Sri Chathana Mahaprabhu, they saw the same dog was sitting a little apart. The Lord which was lost when they were coming, the same dog was sitting at the distance as you would have seen in the creative that we have shared. When all the devotees came there, they saw dog sitting little apart. Furthermore, Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was throwing remnants of green coconut pulp to the dog. Smiling in his own way, he was saying to the dog chant the holy names Rama, Krishna and Hari. Seeing the dog eating the green coconut pulp and chanting Krishna, Krishna again and again. All the devotees present were very much surprised. The dog was eating coconut pulp and he started chanting Krishna, Krishna. When he saw the dog sitting in that way and chanting the name of Krishna Shivananda because of his natural humility, immediately offered his obeisances to the dog just to counteract his offenses to it. So just see pure devotees offering respects obesiences to the dog to counteract the offenses. He could not take care of him very nicely. So he offered his dandavat to dog. And next day no one saw that dog for it had obtained its spiritual body and departed for Vakuntha, the spiritual kingdom. So this is the power of pure chanting and many devotees they were able to make. There was another devotee by the name Rasikanandrabhu. He was disciple of Shamanandrabhu. Those who know vrindavan there is Radha Shyam Sundar Temple. Those who do not know, we will show you in Karthik. Be ready. So Shamanandrabhu was founder of that temple and his disciple was Rasikanandrabhu. Rasikanandra was such an advanced devotee of Krishna that Lord Jagannath would not move forward in his Ratha. And King is putting elephants still the ratha is not moving. Then in a dream he told I'm waiting for my devotee Rasikanand when he comes then only my Ratha will move. And the King were waiting eagerly who is this devotee? Lord Jagannath is not moving for him. And when Rafikanandrabhu came, the ratha moved like that and then he became very famous. So Lord stood there just because of you. So he was able to even make an elephant devotee. And elephant was following the instructions very very nicely and even going to collect donations and other things like that. So like this many wonderful activities are there where the powerful devotees of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Chathane also when he was traveling in the forest Jharikanda, he was able to make all the animals chant and dance. They forgot completely that they are in the animal body. They came back to their spiritual position. They raised their hands all the tigers and deers. They started embracing each other, kissing each other and they started chanting the name. So this was witnessed by the two Brahmanas who were traveling with Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. And here it was witnessed by all of them. There were hordes of devotees in Jagannath Puri who had assembled there. And they also how the dog was chanting Krishna, Krishna. So very powerful devotees like Lord Chaitanya who have his special mercy they can bestow such mercy upon even the animals. So Prabhupada explains this is the result of Sadhusanga consequent association with Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and promotion back home back to Godhead. So first when we associate with the devotees by the association of devotees a person gets association of Lord Krishna, Lord Chaitanya and then what happens? The promotion happens back home back to Godhead. This result, so we should understand carefully, is possible even for a dog by the mercy of a Vaishnava. Therefore everyone in the human form of life should be induced to associate with the devotees. By rendering a little service. Even by eating prasad, not to speak of chanting and dancing everyone could be promoted to Vakuntaloka. So just see how powerful statement it is. By rendering little service even by eating prasad, not to speak of chanting and dancing everyone could be promoted to Vakuntaloka. It is therefore now this instruction is there for us. It is therefore requested that all our devotees in the ESCON community become pure Vaishnavas. So that by their mercy all the people of the world will be transferred to Vakunthaloka even without their knowledge. So people wonder that God, why God has created this entire world? What God is doing? What must be his activities. So it is mentioned in the scriptures god has got no activity. God is just engaged in one activity, nothing else. And what is that activity? God's only activity, only desire is to fulfill the desires of his devotees. And what is the desire of the devotee? The devotees also have no other desire but to fulfill the desires of Krishna. So thus there is a competition among the both. So thus pure devotee has no desire. So what is Krishna's desire? Everyone becomes devotee. So when a pure devotee who does not desire anything for himself if anybody becomes favorite, he is able to get favor mercy of such a pure devotee. And pure devotee prays to Krishna krishna, please accept him in your devotional service. Please liberate him. Then Krishna accepts. So thus Prabhupada is telling to all the devotees who are there in the movement they should become pure Vaishnavas. So that by their mercy all the people of the world will be transferred to vaikunthaloka even without their knowledge. So thus pure devotees blessings are very very powerful. So we should just try to engage in the service of devotees, never offend them. And if they pray for us, then very easily even without their knowledge Krishna will accept us. And we're advanced the service of pure devotees. So powerful. So everyone should be given a chance to take prasad and thus be induced to chant the holy names of Hare Krishna and also dance in ecstasy by these three processes. Which three processes? Accepting Krishna Prasadam. Very simple. Whatever you are making in your house, simply offer everything to Krishna and eat and dance and sing. That's it. Chant, dance, honor prasadam. That's it. Very simple. We can use our tongue, we can use our body to dance and take prasadam. By these three processes although performed without knowledge or education even an animal went back to Godhead. Just see this is the special potency of this process. Such are the transcendental pastimes of Sri Chaitanyma Prabhu, the son of mother Shachi. He even delivered a dog simply by inducing it to chant the Mahamantra Hare Krishna. So thus Chaitanyma Prabhu is very merciful thing which is not possible for advanced brahmanas is provided even to the lowest animals. So thus the most important thing the crux here to realize is association of devotees. So some quotes I will read from Prabhupada about the association. Prabhupada is telling and these are from the translations of the Bhagavatam also very powerful words. A pure devotee is a completely surrendered soul unto the personality of Godhead. He knows the personality of Godhead as the supreme proprietor and all others as his servitors. And by the association of pure devotees only one can get rid of all sins accumulated by mundane association. So simply by associating with the materialist we are sharing their sinful activities. We reveal our heart, hear from them, we exchange food items and all these things we are picking up their sinful activities. So all these sins which we acquire by mundane association how a person can get freed only by the association of pure devotees? There is no other way. Only by pure devotees association we can get freedom from the sins and thus come out of duality of desire and hate. A neophyte devotee must faithfully serve the pure devotee. And he should be very much obedient and strictly follow the instructions. So we should very faithfully serve pure devotee very much obedient and strictly follow the instructions. These are the signs of a devotee who is determined to achieve success even in the existing duration of life. So spiritual life is not a post dated check. At death you will realize no. A person who is sincere who wants spiritual success even in this body before death. These are the signs. Such a person will attain perfection that he should very faithfully serve pure devotee. He should be very much obedient and strictly follow the instructions. In serving the senses, the living being is never tired. Even though he may be tired. The illusory energy perpetually forces him to do so without being satisfied. So illusory energy the nature forces us to do sinful activities. Even though a person may get tired sometimes they don't get tired. They keep on working hard. Sometimes he's tired. He's feeling tremendous harassment. But still nature forces without satisfaction. There is no end to such sense gratification business. And the conditioned soul becomes entangled in such servitude without hope of release. Thus people become hopeless prabhu. I cannot come out of this addiction. It is very bad. There is no hope for me. So it is told here. Yes, there is no hope of release ordinarily but the release is only affected by association with pure devotees. So such helpless situation can be solved by association only affected by the association with pure devotees. In Sanskrit, this highest stage is called prema. Prema can be defined as love of God without any expectation of exchange or return. So the highest stage of love love begins from some attachment. But the highest stage of love is called prema. Actually, the words prema and love are not synonymous. Yet one can say that prema is the highest stage of love. One who has attained prema is the most perfect human being. Srimad Bhagavatam also confirms this statement. Only by the association of pure devotees can one develop a taste for Krishna consciousness. And when he tries to apply Krishna consciousness in his life he can achieve everything up to the stage of Bhava and Prema. So taste in Krishna consciousness is possible only in the association of devotees. And thus these higher stages can be attained. This is the secret association of the pure devotee of the Lord. Without association of pure devotee of Lord, nobody can come to the stage. Unflinching faith and devotion to the supreme Personality of Godhead. So a person will not be able to have unflinching faith in God. He will never develop understanding. He will never develop devotion to supreme Personality of Godhead. Nobody can come without association of pure devotee. Unflinching faith is not possible. So thus there are endless glories in the scriptures. Which are defining association. We have seen in the example of dog in Chaitanya Charitamrita there are instances in the life of all the advanced devotees simply by association they made their life successful. So Lord Krishna mentions so many, many people, they claim that Aham Brahmasmi, many people wear tagline and they preach I am spirit soul. But they are not brahm. They are not realized that they are spirit souls. Who is Brahm? Who has realized that he is spirit soul? Krishna mentions here jara Amarana, Mokshaya Mam Ashritiyatantite So by such association of pure devotee, a person understands krishna is God unflinching faith. And then he takes shelter of Krishna. He surrenders to Krishna Jara Marana Mokshaya. For what? For Jara Maran? For freedom from old age and death. Again Krishna is reiterating the objective of human form of life. We have to solve problem of old age and death. And then thus to solve all such problems, anybody who has taken shelter what to speak of unconditional loving service of a pure devotee, even those who want to solve problem of birth and death and they take shelter of Krishna. Krishnam Adhyatmam Karma Chathilam. They are called Brahm. Krishna is telling. They are actually Brahm because they entirely know everything about transcendental and fruitive activities. So only devotees who have taken refuge in Krishna, in devotional service, they are actually realized souls, that they are spirit souls. No other person has perfect realization. They just speak theory. They are on theoretical platform. So here very clearly it is mentioned which person has got spiritual realization. Mam Ashriti Yatantite who is endeavoring, who is surrendered to Me he is endeavoring to solve the problems of birth, undertaking my shelter completely. He knows perfectly what is material activity, what is spiritual activity. He is brahm. He is spiritually realized soul. Then Lord Krishna mentions last lok of this chapter. Sadhibutadi Daivam sadhiya gamchaye viduhu prayanakalay apichamam teviduryukta Chaitasah. Those who know me as the Supreme Lord, as the governing principle of the material manifestation, who know me as the one underlying all the demigods and as the one sustaining all sacrifices can, with steadfast mind, understand and know me even at the time of death. So anybody who has associated with pure devotee, he has taken refuge in Krishna, shelter in Krishna, engaged in his service with determination, he is able to understand. Krishna is adibut. Krishna is governing principle of all the material manifestation sun, planet, vegetables, rains, anything which is happening DNA, RNA, cells, all the mechanisms. Krishna is the governing principle of all the material mechanisms. He is able to understand the science, he is the root cause. He is adidaeva. He is the underlying principle of all the demigods. He is giving power to all the Devatas and Sadhi Yajnam he is the principle sustaining all the Yajna sacrifices also. And a person who has this knowledge prayan Kali when he's leaving the body at the time of death, he can understand Krishna. He can think of Krishna with great attachment and thus his life becomes successful. So very beautifully the steps of spiritual advancement are mentioned. And the most important, the first step which we should very firmly take shelter of is association of pure devotees of Krishna, Thakur, Tomara, Kukur. So somehow or the other we should try to desire. I don't have any other thing. No other attainment is worthy of desiring. Because it is temporary. I will continue in future bodies. So the only thing which is desired as per the vedas is even taking birth as an instruct in the house of Vaishnava. So please understand this very important. Never compromise for any material temporary gain. Never compromise association with the devotees. So somehow if comforts are less, money is less. Some discomforts are there. Always desire. Tolerate all the material mental physical discomforts. But just go for the association of devotees. And then even a dog became successful by availing such facility. Somehow by rendering service get the favor from the pure devotee. Somehow become favorite of pure devotee. If pure devotee is thinking of us, that is success of our spirit life. So with this we will."