"Chapter Seven Knowledge of the Absolute Text one shri Bhagavanuvacha Maya Sakta Manafparta Yogam Yunjan Madashayah Asanshayam Samagram Yatagyasyasita Shrino you translation now here, O son of Pritha Arjun how by practicing yoga in full consciousness of me, with mind attached to me, you can know me in full, free from doubt. So let us hear in the purport the explanation given by Srila Prabhupada. So this is very important verse asan Shayam Samagramam Yata Agyasi Tachrino in the 7th chapter of Bhagavad Gita, the nature of Krishna consciousness is fully described. Krishna is full in all opulences and how he manifests such opulences is described herein also. Four kinds of fortunate people who become attached to Krishna and four kinds of unfortunate people who never take to Krishna are described in this chapter. In the first six chapters of the Bhagavad Gita, the living entity has been described as non material spirit soul which is capable of elevating himself to self realization by different types of yoga. At the end of the 6th chapter it has been clearly stated. Now this is very important. So in the first six chapters of Bhagavad Gita, the knowledge described there is meant for people who are not able to follow the most intimate process of connection with the super soul with Krishna that is Bhakti Yoga. So those people who are willing to get liberated from the strong entanglement of various laws that give so much of harassment to the conditioned living entities, some people try to analyze, just like we also try to analyze and want to solve the problems of life. So some people, they want to understand truth, come out of all these problems by analysis. And if they are advanced, they are satvic, they will be able to come to the conclusion by this analysis that I am not this body. And then they want to discover that who am I? What is my source? And eventually, when they further advance, they may take to the process of Ashtanga Yoga, the meditative mystic process that we saw in the 6th chapter. But the ultimate objective of following these kinds of yoga does not lead to Samagram or perfect knowledge of Krishna. Perfect knowledge of Krishna can only be attained as Lord Krishna is describing in this chapter, a sun Shayam without any doubts. There are always doubts about absolute truths. So if a person wants to become free from all doubts and understand Krishna in completion, as we discussed in the previous session, somebody who is having knowledge of sunlight, who is in touch with sunlight, he is also in touch with sun. Because sunlight is nothing but extension of sun. Expansion of sun sunlight has no independent existence. But still study of sunlight gives us a very limited idea of what is happening in sun. We also understood how if we can keep or we can have knowledge of somebody by messaging, by calling or by physically associating with him in surrender and love. So who will have best knowledge about the personality who is simply texting or chatting or mailing with somebody or somebody who speaks on call, he will have more knowledge or somebody who is intimately related with that person in surrender and love. So a person who is surrendered who is love, he will have knowledge, the most perfect knowledge about the person. Similarly, Krishna is also a personality. That is why Krishna is called Bhagawan. Bhag means opulences. Van means possessor one who is having opulences. Opulence means which attract us. This is the definition given of God which is called the terminology is called Bhagawan in Hindi means the possessor of the opulences. We get attracted by wealth, we get attracted by power, we get attracted by knowledge, by fame, by renunciation, by beauty. These are the six kinds of things which attract us. And Bhagawan. A person who possesses these opulences in completion shannam Bhak. Iting Ghana. That is called Bhagawan. So Krishna is having most beautiful countenance. Krishna is having all the riches that is there in the world. Krishna is having all the power, all the wisdom, strength and renunciation also. And we are always related to Krishna, eternally related to Krishna. So we are suffering here, working very hard to become rich, famous, powerful and then we lose everything with the body and pick up another body. So the solution for this stage is given by the process of yoga. You need not suffer life after life example given is just like a person who is rotting on the street and trying to find a job. He need not do that. One help could be as somebody comes and gives him some bread to eat. Okay, why you are hungry struggling on the street? Take this. That is one kind of help. Another help is you teach a person how to find a good job, train him and then he has found a job for himself. And now he's self sufficient. He's not dependent on somebody's bread every day. He has to take in arms. He can do job and sustain himself. But the best solution is somebody tells him oh no, you have forgotten you are the son of a very rich father and you have to go back to that father. So that is what the most confidential knowledge Lord Krishna describes here. That is why Lord Krishna is addressed not as Sri Krishna Uvacha in the Bhagavad Gita. But Ved vyas wants to stress that Krishna is Bhagawan. Bhagawan means do not think that he is simply some light or some energy. Krishna is bhagawan. That is why everywhere Sri Bhagavanuvacha here also you see Sri Bhagavanuacha, it is written here. So Vedvyas has never mentioned Krishna Uvacha. Because then we may think some personality by the name Krishna is speaking something. Many people speak of various things. Why should I be very much interested or let me hear selectively but no, Sri Bhagavan Uvacha. A person who is possessing all the opulences supreme personality. He is speaking so vedyas, wants to assert, wants to drive away this misconception that people have more so in Kalyuga that God is simply some personality. No? So Sri Bhagavanuacha just before the beginning of Kalyuga, it is being asserted here that please understand, god is Bhagawan supreme personality. He is a person and we are all coming from the person. Just like the Son has got right to inherit the property of the father. Similarly, all the Jivas living entities have right to inherit all the opulences of Krishna. So that confidential knowledge. Now we will see Lord Krishna would reveal in Bhagavad gita. What we see in this material world is simply my external energy. I don't directly deal with this energy. There is another energy, spiritual energy. I directly deal in that spiritual domain. There is spiritual world, material world, spiritual world. Some living entities live in the material world. Majority of the living entities live in the spiritual world. And human life is meant simply to transfer ourselves from material world to spiritual world and nothing else. And how a living entity is transferred? The living entity is transferred basis at the time of death, when he's leaving the current body, current situation, what is the consciousness? So at the time of death, if a person is having consciousness of that of snake, he has learned how to become very very competitive and envious in this world. Oh, I cannot see somebody's going ahead of me. I become very very envious. Then next time he can get a snake body. Snake is full of envy. Scorpion body. Somebody has practiced not practiced control over the senses. He has developed dog's mentality open display of affection. The next life you can become dog. You can display all your affection on the street every time. And then I was taking a walk with a devotee and some dogs were sleeping in the parking area of our society. And as we have barely approached even in the proximity of where they are sleeping, but they get scared and they get up. So we can understand how their situation is so how badly they were being harassed by people who passed by. They cannot sleep even peacefully. So this is animal life. Another animal can attack. There is no door you can lock. You cannot put a guard in the society and have a peaceful sleep. You have to sleep somewhere. And while you are sleeping, somebody will come and kill you. So that is why at the slightest of the noise you have to get up. Be always alert. Very very horrible life. So this kind of life forms people get. So this science is not known to people. So this is very important. At the time of death, what consciousness we are carrying and antakala chamamas maran muktwa Kalivaram if you leave body thinking of me at the time of death, then you come to me. So the source transmigration. It depends upon the consciousness which we are having at the time of death. And the time of death is very, very horrible. It is usually a very painful situation. So it may be very, very difficult to remember Krishna. Unless somebody is trained to think of Krishna in all circumstances, happiness or distress, then at the time of great distress of death a person, there is a possibility he may be able to think of Krishna. So that is why it is told satam Smartavyam satam Vishnu Vismartavyuna Jatuchit. Always remember Krishna. Never forget Krishna. Whatever rules and regulations you have, there are lacks and lacks of Shlokas in the Vedic scripture. So many rules and regulations are there, so many ceremonies are there, so much of education, is there so much of tapasya yajna training? All those complications are there. Some of them we understand, we don't understand. But all of it is ultimately to bring a person to think of Krishna at the time of death. Eita Van Sankhi Yoga Biham Sadharmaparinishtaya Janmalabhaparapun Sam ante Narayanaspriti the best benefit a person can get by following any path is Ante Narayanaspriti thinking of Krishna at the time of death. So human life is not meant for anything. We need not waste time anyway. Whatever we gain here, we work very hard and we lose our practice of remembering Krishna. And at the time of death we again migrate to some other species here. Then we have lost a great chance. So already we have all opulence. We have very big house, palatial house, we have very nice relatives, friends, society where there is no death, there is no disease, eternal life. But to regain that place, we have to train ourselves to have this consciousness. This is the purpose of all the yogas. That is why yogi practice Kumbhak yoga. So by practicing this yoga they are able to elongate their breath, elongate their breathing cycles which are fixed as soon as we take birth. They want to make sure that my breathing cycles do not get over unless my mind is completely absorbed in my destination. And if they are perfect, their destination would be Vakuntha, the spiritual world. So when they are firmly fixed up in thinking about their destination, thinking about lotus feet of Lord Krishna, then only they finish their breathing cycles. So this is the training which is given in all the yoga practices. And however, abhakti Yogi, he does not go through indirect process. So some people who are not intelligent very much in the bodily concept of life, they cannot understand that I am different from this body. So to realize this fact, they have to undergo this process of Ashtanga yoga. By this breathing in, breathing out, going in jungle, slowly they will understand, they can see yes, I am not this body. And then further they will advance. And those who are advanced, those who are intelligent Srimad Bhagavatam mentions Yajna is Sankirtana, Priya, Yajanti, Suma Dasa the most intelligent people yajna is Sankirtana prior they will take to Sankirtana Yajna. So Prabhupada mentions because our philosophy begins from this point that I am not the body. It may be very difficult to understand for some people. But those who can appreciate, those who are sumedasa very very intelligent, they directly take to this process. They understand what is the use of breathing in and breathing out and doing all this time waste when ultimately you have to come to thinking of Krishna. Let me directly think of Krishna and make our lives perfect. So thus at the end of 6th chapter Lord Krishna describes definitely he is the topmost Yogi who is topmost Yogi who is always Mad Gatemana shraddhawan Bhajate Yomam we saw in previous session shraddhawan with great faith Bhajate who is engaging in my service mad Gatemana is thinking of me within his heart always. He is the best Yogi of all which we have discussed so far. So thus it has been clearly stated at the end of 6th chapter that steady concentration of the mind upon Krishna or in other words Krishna consciousness is the highest form of all Yoga. Lord Krishna has declared so challenge anybody by opening the last chapter. Last loka of the 6th chapter that here you see Lord Krishna is clearly defining who is the topmost yogi. Why don't you teach this kind of yoga matharatmana shraddhawan Bhajate why don't you teach us Bhajan? Shraddhawan bhajan. He is the best Yogi. That Bhajan is simple and so sublime. Then why you are telling us to waste time in so many other practices? So by concentrating one's mind upon Krishna one is able to know the absolute Truth completely but not otherwise. So absolute truth can be known. Krishna can be known only when somebody concentrates his mind upon Krishna impersonal Brahmajyoti or localized Parmatma. Realization is not perfect knowledge of the Absolute truth because it is partial. Somebody shows you milk from a distance then you are perceiving milk. But you are perceiving just something about the milk. You are just perceiving the form of the milk. And then if you are touching it, you may perceive it better. You may perceive the viscosity of the milk and few other things. But if you taste it, then you realize so many things about milk. You realize the taste of the milk. You realize the benefits that you derive by drinking milk. Your body becomes very fit, your brain becomes very sharp and all these things can be realized. So thus it depends on which platform are you realizing milk. Milk is white, this is also knowledge of milk. Milk is liquid, this is also knowledge of milk. But then there is advanced realization also in a similar fashion knowledge of Krishna's energy everywhere. Brahma Jyoti is also knowledge of Krishna but imperfect knowledge that Krishna is present in our heart, that is also knowledge of Krishna but imperfect. But knowledge of personality of Krishna is perfect knowledge of Absolute Truth. So full and scientific knowledge is Krishna and everything is revealed to the person in Krishna consciousness. In complete Krishna consciousness one knows that Krishna is ultimate knowledge beyond any doubts. Different types of yoga are only stepping stones on the path of Krishna consciousness. One who takes directly to Krishna consciousness automatically knows about Brahma, Jyoti and Parmatma in full. By practice of Krishna consciousness Yoga, one can know everything in full, namely the absolute truth, the living entities, the material nature and the manifestations with paraphernalia. One should therefore begin Yoga practice as directed in the last verse of the 6th chapter. So the last verse of 6th chapter is telling concentrate your mind upon Krishna. That is the best yogi. But then this concentration is not possible. So how to go about it? So that is why training is required. And what is the training? Concentration of the mind upon Krishna the supreme is made possible by prescribed devotional service in nine different forms. So there are nine varieties of activities mentioned to help us concentrate upon the form of Krishna. Do this real meditation and of which Shravanam is the first and the most importance. The Lord therefore says to Arjuna Tat shinu or hear from me. In this verse last line Krishna is telling yata Gyasyati tat shinu, please hear from me. So shavadam kirtanam vishnu hosmaranam pada sevanam shavadam means hearing about Krishna Shavadam. When a person has done sufficient hearing then he starts chanting the names of Krishna. He starts talking the philosophy of Krishna that is called Kirtanam. So when the person advances Shravadam Kirtanam, then what happens? Smaranam. He is able to remember. So that is why Kirtana is important. What you have heard, then you should speak. Also speak to others. When you have heard sufficiently, you have realized. And after this you will be able to think about Krishna. And you will be able to understand this philosophy by contemplation. That is called smaranam. So if Shravan is proper, Kirtan will happen automatically. A person will feel enthused to preach to spread this knowledge. If Shravanam is proper and then if Kirtanam is also proper then by this proper combination of Shramanam and Kirtanam, smaranam will happen. This maranam is called Dhyan. The 7th stage of Ashtanga yoga which starts with yam niyam asan pranayam pratyahar dharana. Dhyan. Just before Samadhi. That stage a devotee simply attains by doing Shravanam and Kirtanam smaranam. So this smaranam is called Dhyan. This meditation begins by proper Shravanam and Kirtanam. Shravanam Kirtanam vishnuho Smaranam, padha sevanam. Another process is Padasevanam means serving the lotus feet of Krishna. Goddess Lakshmi is always serving the lotus feet of Lord Vishnu. This is another process. So this is described in the nectar of devotion we should also do. This is one of the regulation. When you go to temple, you are seeing the deities. Then you should try to in your mind offer save art, offer Pada sevanam. Massage the lotus feet of the deities and reveal your heart to the deities pada sevanam, Archanam and then you worship the deities with all the paraphernalia. If you are further qualified so you would have seen in the temple we offer incense, we offer lamp, we offer arghya water, we offer vastra Chamar vyajan all these paraphernalia we offer. So by this we should do deity, worship, archanam and vandanam. What is vandanam? Vandanam means offering prayers. So we should not compose our own prayers. Of course if anything is offered sincerely with the heart, Krishna accepts it. But there are some standard prayers in prayers first of all you have to glorify Krishna for that you have to have knowledge of Krishna. So those devotees who have got knowledge, we simply repeat their instructions. So. Kunti, Marani's prayers are there. Shukdhya. Goswami's. Prayers are there. Prahlad Maharaj is praying in Bhagavatam. Various prayers are there. Prayers of Goswamis are there. Chaitanya Mahapra who has prayed in Shakshtakam the song which we hear before we begin the session. Chaito Dharpanamarjanam Bhava Mahada Vagni Nirvapanam so that is why in all the temples you hear the Sikshastakam devotees sing every day. Aynanda tanajaking karam patitam mambudhao kripayatavapada pankaja stitadholi sadhrisham vishintaya somehow I fall into this ocean of repeated birth and death. Please take me out from this ocean. So these prayers we can offer to Krishna. So that is called vandanam. So we should do these prayers by heart which as mentioned in Bhagavatam by Goswamis Srila Prabhupada has given us various prayers. We should do it by heart and go in front of deities and offer or simply think of the deities in our heart and then offer these wonderful prayers. That is called vandanam. Akru made his life successful simply by offering prayers to Krishna. Vandanam Dasyam dasyam means carrying out the orders of Krishna. Whatever Krishna says done immediately executed Lord Hanuman. So Lord Hanuman did not take birth in the human species also. And still whatever Lord Ramchandra would do immediately he would carry out. So he made his life successful simply by Dasyam engaging in service. Sakhyam sakhyam means friendship. So why we want to have friends? Because our source origin he also likes to have friendship. So because we are coming from him we are getting the qualities of God. So Gods want to have friend. One who fulfills the desires of God. Being a friend usually everyone behaves like child of God. God, give me this, give me this. We are always wanting. So it is told that is good. But Lord Chaitanya has given this philosophy that at least try to worship Lord Krishna in the position of the parents of Lord Krishna. This is what Lord Krishna especially appreciates parents of Krishna means. Now they are concerned about Krishna. They are not willing to take from Krishna. But they are willing to give Krishna. They are willing to give protection to Krishna. They are willing to give food to Krishna. They are always taking anxiety about Krishna. So Krishna is taking anxiety. Krishna is maintaining all the living entities. So Krishna derives special pleasure if he sees oh, my devotee is taking care of me. This is called vasalerasa. So all these beautiful things, once you finish Bhagavatam, you can get in Chaitanya Charitamrita. So we should be very very eager to finish all these books. So Ramanandra is describing so where Bhagavad Gita finishes Sarv Dharman, Parityaja, Ma'am Shanadam Raja surrender all the religions, all the duties surrender completely unto me which is very very difficult for people to follow. Lord Krishna told Rama nandrai AHA Bahia. So this is external you please something else. Sarodharman parityajya means leaving something. It cannot be the highest activity of the living entity. Activity cannot be negation of something. What do you do if somebody goes to a child who goes to school? No, I don't fight with my friends. I don't fight. I don't steal their lunch boxes. Because he's so scared. He has been told this instruction only aynsa Paramodharma what is your religion? Do not do hinsa. What kind of religion is this? It can be good for people who are doing extreme hintsa. But religion cannot end with not doing something. We have been given senses so many faculties to talk, to think and walk and hear, sing, dance all these activities should be used positively. So that is why Sardharman Parityaja leaving all the duties, material duties, it cannot be the highest Dharma. So then further Ramanandra explains to Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and then finally when he comes to Vatsala Rasa engaging in service of Krishna as parents, then Lord Chaitanya appreciates, yes, this is nice, but please explain further. Then he explains about Madhurasa, in which the gopis serve Lord Krishna. So that is why it is very nice to worship Krishna as master. It is very nice to worship Krishna as King, as people in Dwarka and Mathura may do. But the topmost service is service of the Vajavasis who predominantly worship Krishna in the moods of parents or friends. So that is what Lord Krishna wants. I want to depend upon somebody. Somebody should scold me, somebody should take care of me. Archanam vandanam dasyam Sakhyam so somebody serves Krishna as friend and somebody serves Krishna as parent. So these are various forms of serving Krishna. And then finally Atmanivedanam complete surrenderance to Krishna. So these are various ways of engaging in the service of Krishna. But among all these nine different forms of worship, all of which help us to think of the lotus feet of Krishna, these services are not potent without the first element. And that first element is Shavanam. If we don't do Shavadam nicely, then Prabhupada's deity worship. That is called Sri Vigraha. That is called Archavtar Sri Vigraha. The worship will become Galagraha. Galagraha means just like you see, many temples are there in the country. Some temples would be logged, sometimes the pujaris. Most of the times pujaris are paid. Now cleanliness is not there and he's looking at his watch. When the worship will get over, people are not interested to go. So deity worship has become galagraha. Somebody will give me salary, then I will take care. Otherwise people are not interested. Because the knowledge is not there that this deity is God. So that is why hearing is very very important. Unless hearing is there, person will not be able to perceive the presence of Krishna in the deity. He will think it is simply some stone who bothers taking care of stone. So hearing is very very important. So concentration of the mind upon Krishna supreme is made possible by prescribed devotional service in nine different forms of which Shravanam is the first and the most important. So Shravadam is first element also and most important element also. Shravanam Kirtanam can never be given up. No one can be greater authority than Krishna. And therefore by hearing from him one receives the greatest opportunity for progress in Krishna consciousness. One is therefore to learn from Krishna directly or from a pure devotee of Krishna and not from a non devotee upstart puffed up with academic education. So some people ask that why do I have to accept a middleman? I should know God directly. Yes, you can know God directly. Provided you are capable. You are most welcome. If you are of the capacity of Arjun that you are sitting directly with Krishna. In the same chariot you are able to see Krishna like Lord Brahma or Lord Shiva, then Goddess Lakshmi, then most welcome. You can directly take or Uddhava his friend. So Lord Krishna is their direct instructor. But if you are not so qualified then no problem. Uddhava heard from Krishna and then Uddhava he explained further. Take those instructions in the Guru parampara. Narad muni has understood from Brahma. Brahma understood from Krishna. Then Narad muni gave to Vedvyas. Vedvyas gave to Madhvacharya. This knowledge has come down. So this is also very perfect way of getting knowledge. Without any change, perfect personalities are transmitting knowledge. So that is why if you are very qualified, middleman is not required. You can surpass him directly. Approach Krishna if you cannot approach, ultimately we want perfect knowledge. Krishna, god has perfect knowledge. If we cannot approach him directly. If you cannot ask manufacturer directly, he gives user manual understand from the user manual. And then you can also perfectly operate the machine. But taking knowledge from God is very very important. Because God only can give perfect knowledge. So in Srimad Bhagavatam, this process of understanding Krishna, the supreme personality of Goddess Absolute Truth is described in the second chapter of the first Kantu as follows. So people many times ask prabhu, please teach us some meditation. Which kind of meditation should we do or what can we do for spiritual realization? No, nothing is required. Srimad Bhagavatam, which is the Bhashoyam Brahma Sutranam, the most complex and toughest Vedanta Sutra explanation of that. Srimad Bhagavatam, this process is mentioned that to achieve liberation. A person need not follow so many complex things but follow the process which is described very methodically, step by step manner. In these verses from the second chapter first Kanto of Bhagavatam so all these shlokas you can do by heart. These are very very important. String of Shlokas Shanvatam sokatam Krishna Punya shravanakir tanaha Riddhyantasuhit satam nashta prayeshwa bhadreshu Nityam Bhagavatas Bhagavati uttamash Loki bhaktir Bhavatinaki Tadarajastamo bhava Kamalo Bhada Yashaye Chaita ETA Ana Vidham Sitam satva prasidati avam prasanamanaso bhagavad Bhakti Yogatah bhagavatviyanam Mukta sanghasya jayatyatayagrantesh Chidyante Sarvasan Shayah Shiyante chasi Karmani drishta evatmanish. To hear about Krishna from Vedic literatures or to hear from him directly through the Bhagavad gita is itself righteous activity. Swakatham Krishna. So Krishna is giving knowledge about himself in Bhagavad Gita. So if a person hears the knowledge mentioned in Bhagavad Gita or Bhagavatam Bhagavad Gita krishna explains about himself his activities and in Bhagavatam other devotees are explaining the knowledge about Krishna. So if we hear the activities of Krishna, the knowledge of Krishna punishravana Kirtanaha then this is righteous pious activities. So when a person has sufficient pious activities, then what happens? All this contamination from the heart is washed. By whom? Surit. Surit means best friend. Satam satam means of the devotees. Such devotees are having a best friend Lord Krishna who is situated in Riddhi Antaha Thaha who is situated within the heart. Ridi. Abhadrani. Bhadra means gentle. Abhadra means bad qualities. So all the bad qualities are taken from the heart. When we engage in chanting and hearing the name form activities of our supreme well wisher Lord Krishna. So he's situated in our heart. So he cleanses all the dirt situated in the heart. Nashta prayeshwa Bhadreshu Nityam Bhagwata Sevaya so all the dirty things within the heart what is the dirty thing? Lust and greed. So when we tell that somebody's heart is not good, why? Because he has excessive lust or excessive greed. So when these dirty things are destroyed, not completely prayeshu prayeshu means almost completely destroyed. You need not wait for complete cleansing when it is almost destroyed. Cleared up. How it is cleared up by Nityam bhagavata Sevaya so a person has to hear constantly. Nitya means always lord Krishna is dwelling in everyone's heart, acts as best well wishing friend and Purifies the devotee constantly engages in hearing of Him. So Prabhupada would criticize that people here just hear Bhagavas Saptah bhagavad Sapta was heard by Parishit Maharaj. Parishit Maharaj had just seven days in his life. So he could not hear for more than seven days. But he heard till the time of his death. So this is what we should do. We should keep on hearing Bhagavatam till the time of death. Parishit Maharaj engaged in Nityam bhagavad sevaya continuously. He was hearing bhagavat. So thus we should not imitate Parishit Maharaj that he heard only for seven days. No, because he finished his life in seven days. So we should continuously keep on hearing Bhagavatam. And when it is not possible to hear Bhagavatam then what to do? Then we should contemplate upon it whatever we have heard entire day we should keep in our mind and try to think how to execute implement those instructions. If there are qualities about Krishna describing some slokas are describing then we can think about qualities of Krishna form of Krishna in this way we should try to contemplate Bhagavati uttama Shloki bhaktir Bhavati Naishtiki then uttam Shlokh means Krishna bhagavati means Supreme Lord. So when we engage in hearing the topics about Supreme Lord bhaktir Bhavati Naishtiki then continuous we have to hear. Continuous is very very important. Sometimes we hear and then we forget entire day we could not remember what we have heard in the morning that is why morning and evening both times we hear. So in the morning I heard something, I read and then I have forgotten entire day that should not happen I'm working and if in the background suppose you are working in the kitchen you are doing the dishes, play Prabhupada's tapes and Prabhupada is giving lecture you keep on hearing and engage in your activity. So in this way as much as possible we should hear. When we are not able to hear then we should try to contemplate upon it. But somehow as far as possible hearing should be done. And when in this way a person is in constant touch with Krishna by Nityam nityam means constant continuous then what happens? bhaktir bhavati Naishtiki so initially Bhakti is on a tottering platform. Sometimes we have faith sometimes we lose faith. So this firmness clarity is not attained unless nashta Praishwa, Bhadrashu the Rajasthamas the lust and greed are taken away from the heart as long as there is lust in the heart as long as there is greed in the heart greed means I am not satisfied simply by maintaining my body and soul together. Then you should be very peaceful not trouble your brain so much. Why? I'm not able to understand God? With lust and greed. It is not possible to understand God how much ever we must train our brain just like a person who is having lot of temperature in his body, lot of cuff and other things he should be patient when he's not able to get the taste of food. It is not possible when you are having so much temperature in the body to taste food. Food would be bitter. In a similar fashion Krishna consciousness may taste bitter we may not get that taste or sometimes no taste we may not have that clarity. So we should not puzzle ourselves by that and understand that lust and greed is present in the heart. I am not satisfied with simple living and high thinking. So it is not possible in my platform to have clarity about Krishna consciousness. So all these doubts will remain. So be patient with that. Be patient and try to execute this bhagavat nityam bhagavata sevaya and when the heart is almost completely cleared then bhakti naishtiki when I'm freed from all the anarthas unwanted bad habits then naishtiki a person gets fixed up in bhakti tadarajastamo bhava Kamalobhadayash chaye then what happens when tadarajastamo bhava Kamalobhada kam and Lobha as we discussed? Kam means lust. Lust does not always mean enjoyment of reproductive organs or thinking in mind such thoughts. Enjoyment with the opposite. Sex kama means Atmayendriya Priti, Vansha Tari, Bali Kam satisfying my senses independent of Krishna I have desire I want to eat something which is not offered to Krishna which is not Prasadam then that is called calm I should not desire to eat anything which is not offered to Krishna, then that is called Prema. If I want to see something in which Krishna's pleasure is not involved then that is called Karma. If I want to read something in which Krishna's pleasure is not involved, then that is called karma. I want to visit someplace people are very fond of visiting some sightseeing spots. But where is Krishna's pleasure in that? So devotee only goes to Krishna's Dharma his Abodes. He does not take any pleasure in visiting place which is not connected to Krishna in which Krishna's pleasure is not involved. So any kind of activity in which Krishna's pleasure is not involved that is called calm. That is called lust. So lust and greed. This is washed away from the hearth. As he hears more about Krishna from the Bhagavatam and from the devotees he becomes fixed in the devotional service of the Lord. By development of devotional service one becomes freed from modes of passion and ignorance. So all these lower modes are completely flushed away from the heart. We are feeling so much harassment. I know this is not good. What to do? Like Dhritarashtra told I know Krishna is supreme my sons are not doing good but what to do? I am so much attached so I am understanding this is not right helplessly I'm feeling lusty helplessly I'm feeling greedy helplessly I'm feeling attached so all these things are because of presence of these modes in the heart when these modes are washed away. A person is very, very peaceful. Chaith ita ana vidam sitam sathve prasidati by development of devotional service one becomes freed from the mode of passion and ignorance. Thus, material lust and avarice are diminished. When these impurities are wiped away, the candidate remains steady in his position of pure goodness. Before that, sometimes we will be in goodness. Morning. We have done mangalarti. We have read Bhagavatam associated with devotees. Then we are in. Satvuna then daytime increases we forget the morning program, we forget Krishna we come to mode of passion sometimes we make light to mode of ignorance also and then again we come to Satvaguna we heard again associated with the devotees did some kirtan again tamuguna can come but by continuous hearing hearing hearing hearing hearing and then what happens? Sitam Satva, Prasidati person becomes established on the platform of goodness and then when he's fixed up in goodness then what happens? Avam Prasana Manasa when these impurities are wiped away the candidate remains steady in his position of pure goodness becomes enlivened by the devotional service and understands the science of God perfectly. Avam prasan Namanasa as soon as a person is established in mode of goodness prasanna manasa he becomes very very happy jubilant. So that is why somebody was when he told that he is so Prabhupada tells then he's rascal he's not following Krishna consciousness nicely. Because if you follow Krishna consciousness nicely where is a question of moroseness? You will automatically be on the Satva prasidati you will be Prasidati very very jubilant, very enlivened and Prasanna Manasa with great happiness, with great joy. Bhagavad Bhakti Yogatah in this enlivened state when a person engages in Bhakti yoga then what happens? Bhagavat Tatvikyanam then science of God is understood. So it is very important to execute Bhakti in Prasanna manasa in great happy mood. And we will become happy by coming out from this karma and loba lust and greed of the heart. So people want to increase lust. People are very greedy and they tell us prabhu, please conduct workshop on stress management. All the companies and colleges they demand that and we explain them. Please understand it is not possible how much ever sessions we may give or you can hear from any other place end result would be failure. You may get old, you may be on the deathbed but as long as you don't come to Satvaguna it is not possible to come out of stress to become happy. Happiness is the result of a mode of nature and that is called Satvaguna. So if a person is not established on satvaguna, it is not possible. So you want to carry lust and greed in the heart. You want to work very hard in your company to fulfill your lusty desires and then you want stress management also. Nobody can manage your stress. Nobody can manage. So don't waste time and continue somehow with your stress. It is not possible to solve it. But if you want to solve the process is given here. What is the process? Shanvatam Sakata Krishna punya Shavana kirtana Nityam bhagwata sevaya continuously keep on hearing Bhagavat and then when a person in this happy mood he executes Krishna consciousness there is no moroseness at all. He is very jubilant then bhagavat mukta sanghasya Jayate bhakti Yoga severs the hard knot of material affection this material affection is causing all the trouble. So a person perfectly knows the science of God. Bhagavatata Vikyanam and then this hard knot of material affection is severed by the process of Bhakti yoga a person will not feel attached to anything. He will be free. Vidyante ridaya granthish so there is this attachment is felt because the energies are acting in the heart and a knot is formed of energies within our heart. So this knot is dismantled by Bhagavatata Vigyanam Chidyante Sarva Sanchaya Sanchaya doubts can be there. We have many doubts in life. Chidyante Sarva Sanchaya all the doubts are destroyed. Shiyante chase Karmani we are suffering only because of past Karma bad activities, sinful activities shiyante chase Karmani person will be able to get freedom from all the past sinful activities drishta. EVAT Manishwari and he will be able to understand the self, the supreme self by this simple process of heart will be completely cleansed by the simple process of Nityam Bhagavata Sevaya. So thus it is not an ordinary process. Continuously we have to engage ourselves in hearing. So this is the process. So 1 may ask but Prabhu, how is it possible? We have our job, we have so many devotees how we can hear Bhagavatam morning to evening and even if we decide to hear our mind will not allow us to hear. It is not possible to have so much taste in Bhagavatan that we keep on hearing. So so many people they come, they hear but they are not able to continue. They drop out. So that is why Krishna is very very merciful. So there are two kinds of Bhagavat which is described. One bhagavat is book Bhagavat. So hearing Bhagavatam understanding Bhagavatam is also called Bhagavata Sevaya and Bhagavat bhagawan anything which is connected to Bhagawan is called Bhagavat. So there is book which is describing the activities of God that is also called Bhagavat. And then there is a personality whose life is personification of that book. All the knowledge of that book the person has imbibed in his life he is called person Bhagavat that is why Sarub Dhamodar Chattanama Prabhu secretary he tells Bhagavata Puragiya Bhagavatasthani now you have heard oh Nityam Bhagavat Sevaya yes I have to hear Bhagavatam Abhi Kalse Bhagavatam Sapta we will start and then we will hear. So many speakers we have on so many YouTube channels. So it is told in Padmapuran in various places. Rub Goswami Reiterates in nectar of devotion Putam Hari Katham Ritam Shavadan Nayavakartavyam Sarpo Chasta Yatapayah Sarpo Uchashta just like the milk is touched by the sarpa, by the snake it becomes very poisonous. So all the milk is having all the proteins, all the nutrients, calcium, carbon whatever you call it but there is one very dangerous thing, poison which has entered into that milk. So when you drink that milk you will not get the nourishment. Rather death will happen by that. So that is why we should be very careful. Hearing. Simply hearing will take us to the platform of Shante chase Karmani freedom from all past Karma liberation solution Service Sanchayaha all the doubts will be destroyed. Simply keep on hearing. Hearing, hearing, hearing all the doubts will be destroyed. And it does not matter in which language you are hearing here understanding is not mentioned. Understanding automatically will develop by hearing. Once Prabhupada was delivering in Gujarat a Hindi lecture. And when Prabhupada began speaking Hindi Disciples started getting up and walking away. And then Prabhupada told them you don't understand, I am speaking for you. So you do not realize that it is the hearing process which gives realization. Understanding is secondary. Just try to hear with submission and with great attention. So just see what is the power of hearing. This we do not realize. And Prabhupada told my Guru Maharaj became very pleased with me simply because he noticed this disciple hears very carefully, he does not go away. So it is this hearing process, this spiritual master greatest pleasure. If he sees disciple is hearing very nicely, very consistently with great attention then the spiritual master is very much pleased. So Prabhupada told this was my qualification. My Guru Maharaj became pleased because he saw this boy does not go away. He keeps on hearing very nicely. So very nice. Pastime is there of Prabhupada when Prabhupada was there in Vrindavan. And Prabhupada was also a householder. It is not possible for householders to very frequently go to the Dham. And thus Prabhupada was there and many other people had come. So there was announcement that we are all going for Govardhan, Parikrama and bhaktis. Dhant Maharaj would also speak on Bhagavatam. So people who like can come for Parikrama and others can stay back. So we are very fond of seeing various places. That is why we go for Dham Yatra. But Prabhupada was fond of something else. Prabhupada chose to stay back and most of the devotees they chose for know once in a year we come to Vrindavan, let us do Parikrama. But Prabhupada was sitting there and he was hearing. And few other very select sannyasis they were sitting with Prabhupada. Prabhupada was not a Sanyasi at that time a householder and they were hearing. And Bhaktisana Maharaj kept on talking 1 hour, two hour for a long time. And the sannyasis started going away also. But Prabhupada kept on sitting hearing with great attention, with great intent. And Prabhupada also tells what my Guru Maharaj was speaking at that time I was not able to understand. He was speaking from a very high platform. But then somehow I had developed a desire that I want to hear from this person. I was liking when he was speaking. This is called hearing process. So if we apply ourselves positively in this process of submissive and attentive hearing we will realize. Just hearing gives so much of pleasure. So thus Prabhupada told his disciples this very important fact to realize. Please understand. Even though Bhagavatam is happening in another language but if it is from proper source you lend your ears to hear Bhagavatam simply attentive submissive hearing will bring realization. Even though it is in different subject, it is in different language. So we should hear from proper source and from improper source with the most melodious singing with many many quotations from the scriptures backed up with great spiritual scriptural knowledge. If the person is not a devotee he is doing this katha for getting some money for his personal or family maintenance then we should not hear from that person. If he's impersonalist we should never never hear. So such a person who is doing Bhagavatam as his bread and butter as a profession or he is an impersonalist, he is not a devotee. In conclusion avaishnava mukhod Ginam Putam harikatamritam so Padmapurana has told first of all see he should be a bona fide vaishnava avaishnava if he's not vaishnava mukhonam Putam harikatamritham Shavanam naivakartavyam never hear from a person who is not a vaishnava sarpo chishtayatapaya it is like drinking milk which is tasted by a snake. It will cause your death. So we should be very very careful. We should hear only from the right source, from the parampra of pure devotees coming from Lord Krishna himself. So then it will be effective. So if we are able to hear from the pure devotee directly that is most amazing. So that is why I request all of you on our telegram channel we have posted the SoundCloud link. You search SoundCloud and all the Prabhupada lectures are there of Bhagavatam bhagavad Gita keep on hearing every day at least one lecture you hear you are driving, you are working in your house everywhere. Try to play one lecture. You are getting up ready in the morning. Play one lecture. Try to hear that. Or the disciples of Prabhupada tells so my disciples, they are my representatives and if the disciple is sincere we hear from them. It is same as hearing from the spiritual master. That is also right but we have to hear from the right source, from non devotee. We should completely avoid hearing rather than liberation that will finish our spiritual life. So Bhagavata puragiya Bhagavatasthane Sarubdamoda told Bhagavatam should be heard from a person Bhagavatam who is living this knowledge of Bhagavatam in his life. So somehow if we cannot do nityam Bhagavad sevaya not continuously hear Bhagavatam then Bhagavat also means person Bhagavat sevaya we can engage in the service of Bhagavat. So either we should hear Bhagavat or we should engage ourselves in the service of Bhagavad. This is very much possible. This everybody can do. So if a person can directly engage in service when spiritual master is personally present we can engage in personal service in offering service to his body. Those people who cannot do that, they have a picture frame of the spiritual master. They can worship that. They can offer all the paraphernalia, they can offer food items and all their stuff. A person can cook for the spiritual master in this way. Physically a person can engage in service of spiritual master. And if it is not possible to serve physically there is no difference between spiritual master and the sound of the spiritual master. The instructions of the spiritual master so if a person is carrying out the orders of the spiritual master that is also called bhagavata Sevaya and rather that is more important. So there is no difference between on absolute platform. There is no difference between person and a person's form Krishna and form of Krishna spiritual master and their form or picture there is no difference. What is the meaning of no difference? No difference means we will perceive the same effect. You put gulab jamun on your tongue you feel some sweetness. So in a similar fashion when you meet Krishna personally you feel some amazing ecstasy in the body. And same ecstasy can be felt by chanting and hearing the names of Krishna as that of meeting Krishna. This is the meaning of non difference. Same person Krishna is present in the form of holy name. Similarly the effect which a person has by meeting the spiritual master the same ecstasy can be derived by associating with the picture of the spiritual master and greater effect can be derived. So disciple asked Prabhupada Prabhupada so spiritual master is non different from his picture. Prabhupada told yes spiritual master's picture is non different. There is no difference between so spiritual master is as present personally as he's in his form. And then Prabhupada told he is more present in his instructions. More present means he is more willing to give association through his instructions. Just like Krishna is present in his deity, in his prasadam, in his form in everywhere. But Krishna is more present in the form of holy name. Similarly spiritual master is more present in the instructions. So if we want to have association of the spiritual master we should try to associate with the instructions by careful reading and then willing and diligent implementation of those instructions. Then that is also called Bhagavata sevaya. So we have to hear Bhagavatam as far as possible. And when hearing is not there we are engaging in some activity. Those activities should be to fulfill the instructions of spiritual master or the activities which we are doing. The result of that activity should be engaged in the service of Bhagavad Sevaya spiritual master. In this way when we mold in our life in Nityam Bhagavad sevaya morning to night either I am hearing Bhagavatam or I am engaged in the service of personal Bhagavatam. Personal bhagavat. Then what happens? This TADA Arajastamo Bhava all this is cleansed from the heart by constant Bhagavat sevaya heart is cleansed. Person comes to satvaguna he becomes very very happy. In this happy mood when devotional service is executed then Bhagavat tattvikyanam signs of God is perfectly known and then all the attachment is cut and all the doubts are completely cleared and a person is able to see himself and see Lord Krishna face to face. All this begins from hearing constant hearing. So please follow this process very very sincerely. Prabhupada when we are hearing Krishna so don't do when I'm chanting Hare Krishna we should understand Hare Krishna, Radha Krishna they are present here. Prabhupada tells so in this way here is Radharani here is Krishna in this way with great respect. Just like Krishna comes personally here or any great man how much respectful we will be in this manner we have to do Shamanam. So a quality is required in such kind of Shamanam also with this knowledge that Krishna is personally present Prabhupada told there is no difference between the book of Krishna and Krishna. So when you are reading the book when you are hearing from the book you should worship this kind of hearing. So that is why we should be very attentive, very worshipful in our attitude of book reading and lecture hearing or book hearing. So with this attitude also Shravanam hearing is important. So Shravanam should be from the right source and Shravanam should be continuous and Shravanam should be in proper attitude in a worshipful mood. I am worshipping Krishna by my hearing potency. So when we implement Shamanam in this way then successwari is sure. Perfect knowledge of Krishna is sure. So with this we."