"Text number twelve yechai vasatvikabhava rajasastamaschaye mata shutemay translation all states of being, be they of goodness, passion or ignorance, are manifested by my energy. I am in one sense everything, but I am independent. I am not under the modes of this material nature we saw in this chapter. Lord Krishna has described knowledge about his own self which is very very difficult to understand even in our regular affairs. If we have to have knowledge about any person, only if a person can explain, we can know him. Otherwise it is very difficult. So what to speak of God who has got such amazing existence and so many energies? How we small living entities can figure out who are not even a bacteria on universal scale and how we can compare to a person from whose pores universes are coming out? He is the creator of unlimited universes. So it is very very difficult job unless Krishna explains. So that is why this bhagavad gita is so wonderful literature. Because Lord Krishna himself is explaining knowledge of his personality and his energies. So here Lord Krishna explained there are two kinds of energies he is having. One is external energy. Another is he is having unlimited energies. But broad classification can be internal and external. Parasy shaktir, vividhai vashruyati he has unlimited energies. All of them can be classified either as internal or external. External energies are the gross and subtle elements. Eight elements panchamahabhut and mind, intelligence, false ego and internal potency. Lord Krishna explains means the energy which is completely spiritual, directly connected to Lord Krishna. And one kind of internal energy is the living entity, the Jeevatatva, all of us. But a unique name is given to this internal potency which is called Jivatatva, which are called Vibhan anshas. And that name is called Tatasta Shakti. What is the meaning of Tata Shakti? That means marginal potency, tat. We go to the seashore. So we see, sometimes it is covered by water and sometimes it is part of land. So that is called tat, or the shore, the boundary. So in a similar fashion, we the living entities can either take shelter of internal potency or external potency. That freedom is given to the living entities. But we are completely spiritual in nature. So when we take shelter of spiritual potency, our situations like fish which has taken shelter of water, it is completely satisfied and happy. But as soon as we enter the material nature, then the situation becomes very, very complicated. So when the living entities are there in this material world and they are covered by these eight elements, material energies, what is their situation? That is explained now by Lord Krishna. Here how these energies are interacting. These are my eight energies. And in this material world there is superior energy called Jeevatva, which is sustaining all the other energies. Without living entity, nothing can happen on any of the planets. No machines will work, no buildings will be constructed. So it is a living entity which is sustaining. Now, how these energies interact, that Lord Krishna is explaining now. So all the manifestations that we see around us, they are manifestation of interaction of three primary energies. All these eight elements Bhume, Rapo, Nalovayu, Kamana, buddhi, earth, air, water, fire, sky, mind, intelligence, false, ego they are produced by the combination of these three modes of nature called satvaguna, rajoguna and Tamuguna. And what happens when these energies interact with the living entity? Tribir gunamayer Bhavay AB sarvam idam jagat mohitam nabijanati mame biafparam avyayam deluded. By the three modes goodness, passion and ignorance. The whole world does not know me who am above the modes and inexhaustibles. So what is the meaning of above? Above means elevating going high up. Just like we have some evolution theory in our syllabus which may be Charles Darwin, he read Padmapurana and he tried to figure out something but he could not understand that evolution is not of the body but of the soul. Monkey becomes human, that is right, that is mentioned in the vedas. But it is not that the monkey body has become human body. Just like assistant Commissioner will become commissioner. So that is a different post. He has to change his office and all these things will be given to him in a similar fashion. These are different posts and different luxuries. Comforts are given as per the bodies. It is not that the body has transformed overnight. So he was assistant commissioner. His office will not transform now. He's going to sit into commissioner's office. In a similar fashion. Our body will not transform from monkey to humans but the soul has to leave and enter another body. In this way it is promoted or it undergoes evolution. And evolution is high up the ladder. The lower species are completely in tamoguna ignorance. Then when the living entity rises up, then rajasic living entities, human beings are mainly in rajoguna then further evolution is of the devatas. They are very very satvic. And then further a person is able to go to should the satvik completely spiritual body. This is the evolution process. However, Lord Krishna, if we have to approach him, we have to not just stop at the mode of goodness which is the highest in this world, but we have to surpass even that. So just like we have education system in our schools and colleges, nursery grade one, grade two, grade ten, twelveTH and graduation masters, postgraduate postdoc, all these levels are there. So in a similar fashion the vanashrama system is instituted by Lord Krishna so that a living entity can be pushed up to higher consciousness. Just like a child is systematically trained to behave intelligently in a similar fashion living entities systematically behave to train, to behave intelligently by pushing him slowly to the mode of goodness and then beyond the mode of goodness in spiritual mode where he can understand Krishna. So those who are new, what are these three modes we are talking about goodness, passion, ignorance. So this is called Satvaguna, rajoguna and Tamuguna. If we belong to India, we would have heard and otherwise these are three energies. Lord Krishna, the original scientist is explaining. These three energies mix with each other. Just like whatever food grains we see around us. It is nothing but combination of earth, water, sunlight. In a similar fashion, these three energies Satvaguna, rajoguna, Tamaguna, the mix and combine whatever we see is around us. And there is nothing in this world but combination of these three energies. And these three energies have unique characteristics. As we have discussed before. When a person is influenced by Tamsic energy, we can feel the influence. So after some time we'll feel very sleepy at night. So nighttime, why we are feeling sleepy? Even though I don't wish to sleep, but I feel sleepy. So the sleepiness laziness is induced by the mode of ignorance. So when this Tamsic energy is very much predominant in the body, then the person behaves ignorantly. Just like a person who is sleeping under the influence of this energy. Then he's completely ignorant of his even gross existence. What to speak of spiritual existence? He does not know what he's supposed to eat or whether he's sleeping at all. Where he's sleeping, what are his duties, what he's supposed to do? He forgets everything. And in mode of ignorance a person destroys. So taking alcohol, drugs, sleeping, laziness, dirtiness, procrastination, meat, eating all these things come under ignorance. So a person is forgetful of reality under such energies influence. And this energy leads to destruction. And destruction is also very important. Because without destruction, creation cannot happen. So this ignorance also plays a very important role in this world. However, living entity should not remain in ignorance but should rise highs in order to solve the problems of life. Because a living entity who is in ignorance he may be able to escape the miseries of life. You are feeling great stress. You sleep or you take some alcohol or you go watch movies, eat something in a restaurant. You may forget for some time. But that is called ignorance. You are ignoring the reality. The problems of life. The problems remain the same. So this is called mode of ignorance. A living entity does not enjoy in this mode. But he is simply escaping. He is hallucinating. Prabhupada gives example rabbit. When it is attacked by tiger or hunter, it closes its eyes and feels that oh yes, I am satisfied, very happy now. But actually it is caught and it is killed very soon. In a similar fashion, if we drink, if we enjoy in this world by sleeping intoxication, we are simply ignoring the problems of life. Another mode is mode of passion. So people on the earthly planet on our level, they are mainly influenced by the mode of passion. Mode of passion means creativity. A person productivity, creativity for this passion is required. So such person is having unlimited desires. Material desires are too many. And thus because of material desires he wants to create something here and there is thus always anxiety there in the mind of a person influenced by the mode of passion. So he thinks if I create something, if I do something, I'll become very happy. But a person is always anxious. So the simple thing people don't understand that you will always remain disturbed if you are passionate and above passion is the mode of goodness. Goodness means we all know some good features that a person has here. He's honest, he is truthful, he's simple, he is humble, he is wise. So when a person is in the mode of goodness, he understands this passionate activity does not make me happy, creates only anxiety for myself and for others. So a person who is mode of goodness, his senses are very much controlled. His mind is controlled and he is intelligent. Person in ignorant tamagona is completely dull headed. Person who is in mode of passion he is half mad. Sometimes he understands something, sometimes he is also carried away. Person in mode of goodness he has intelligence and because he is intelligent, such a person is happy. He has a very simple living. He understands sense enjoyment leads to misery. So he will control his mind and senses. He would be very very truthful and liberation would be the aim of life helping others and ultimate if he is more advanced. He understands liberation is the aim of life. However, he is also deluded a person in mode of goodness brahmanas the Brahmanas are in mode of goodness. So they are also able to just understand. One supreme spiritual energy exists which is different from the energies which make up my body. Because I can understand, I am the witness of whatever is happening on the bodily level and even mental level. So I am different from mind, I am different from body. My body is changing. I am witnessing, I am somebody, something in this body which is not at all a part of these material energies which are changing by the influence of time. But he's not able to understand what is the source of this energy. From where this spiritual energy I am part of that energy is coming. So he is limited by that knowledge of Brahma effulgence brahma jyoti only so a person in the mode of goodness he is also conditioned in this world and he is conditioned by happiness. Because he is intelligent, his senses mind are controlled. He is not disturbed by the forces of nature. So thus he's conditioned and he thinks anyway, I'm peaceful in this world. So he also does not strive further to understand God. Because if you are in stress, you want to know what is reality, what is truth, how to solve the problems of life. So such a person, because he is peaceful, the impetus to advance in spiritual life is taken away. And he's thinking, oh, I am having perfect knowledge because I am happy here. Person in mode of passion, he is conditioned by sense desires. So everyone is conditioned. Somebody is conditioned by golden shackles, somebody by iron shackles. Somebody by silver shackles. So golden shackle is goodness. Passion is silver, ignorance is iron if you can compare it. So mode of passion this person also cannot solve the problems of life. Cannot get unlimited spiritual happiness. Because he is conditioned by his desires. So many desires are there even though there is knowledge. At time Dhitrashtra was knowing that yes, Krishna is supreme personality of Godhead. But Dhitrashtra told I am so much attached to my sense. What do I do? Someday if Krishna gives me sense, I will be able to understand. So this happens with us also. Sometimes we are able to understand. This is truth. But because of material attachments I am not able to follow. This is called passion. Mode of passion. And what is ignorance? A person in ignorance is conditioned by illusion and madness. He's so much hallucinating under illusion. There is no question for him, for any advancement, any knowledge. So in this way all these living entities are conditioned by these energies. So influenced by goodness, he's conditioned by happiness. Influenced by passion, he's influenced by sense gratification. Influenced by ignorance, he is limited conditioned by madness. Here in this material world. So deluded by the three modes. Lord Krishna is telling the whole world does not know me who am above the modes and inexhaustible. Just like a person is deluded by the dream world he does not understand that I have to wake up. And then that is my field of activity. Similarly the field of activity for soul is spiritual platform, spiritual world. And Krishna lives and belongs to that world. Your relatives, you cannot meet them in dream. In reality you can only hallucinate with some people or some forms over there. In a similar fashion just like in dream you feel it is reality, it is going on. And when you wake up you realize, oh, you have family, you have people around you. Similarly and now we are hallucinating. Oh, this is my land, this is my country, these are my people. But this is hallucination. And this hallucination is created by three modes. And people think this world is all in all. But that is not fact. Beyond this world is the spiritual world. And human life is meant for Brahma jiggyasa to understand that spiritual reality. So Krishna tells I am above the modes and inexhaustibles. However, to elevate a living entity slowly out of ignorance to passion, to goodness and then to pure goodness. This vanashrama system is there. Person who is in ignorance, he is called Shudra. If he follows his duty very nicely. Because he is in ignorance, much freedom, money, economic independence is not given to the Shudra. So he should be very tightly governed by those people who are more knowledgeable vaishyas vaishyas are mix of ignorance and passion. And the Vaishyas have little more freedom. They are controlled by the people who are more advanced Kshatriyas. They are in pure passion. Administrators they want to rule over and enjoy sense gratification. And higher than the Kshatriyas are brahmanas. So Brahmanas are given charge to command Kshatriyas. Also when Kshatriya is not doing his activities properly Brahmana can replace him remove him. So the Kshatriyas perfectly follow the dictation of the Brahmanas who are in the mode of goodness. So in this way as the living entity advances in the life he is given more and more freedom. So the more the living entity is in passion and ignorance the more that living entity needs protection and guidance. And freedom should not be given. Otherwise he will spoil his life. Just like if you give money to a child he will spoil his life limited freedom. When the child grows you give him more money and more freedom. And similarly punishment is also more shudra. If he commits some mistakes less punishment will be there. If a Brahmana commits the same mistakes then great punishment would be there. Because Brahmana was not much under influence of the material energy. He was on satvana Satik platform. He was having more independence. But still he has committed some. Heinous act so means voluntarily he has committed that activity. So great punishment is there for Brahmadas just like juvenile court is there. If the children are less than 18 years even though they have committed grievous offense much punishment will not be given. Because they are ignorant animals. If they don't follow traffic laws they will not be persecuted. But if a person does cold blooded murder an adult then great punishment is there. Death is there for him or life sentence. So in a similar fashion the more living entity experiences freedom the more he will be given punishment. So that is why human form of life now we have freedom. Now we can understand and gain complete freedom. Now if the human being commits some mistakes then law of karma create punishment for the human beings. Because you had some choice and you did not execute that choice. Rightly? Animals, there is no karma for them because they are tightly under the modes of nature in ignorance. So Krishna is telling deluded by these three modes the whole world does not know me who am above the modes and inexhaustible so human life is meant for God realization. And by realizing God we can come out of all the problems which are temporary in nature. So somebody was asking in previous class that prabhu it is nice that Lord Krishna is explained in these verses. Balam, Balvatam, Chaham, Kamaragavi, Varjitam I am the strength of the strong intelligence of the intelligent man. I am the effulgence of sun and moon. And Krishna is explaining I am desire which is devoid of lust personal enjoyment. So in this way Krishna is explaining. He's explaining I am sex pleasure which is not against the religious principles which is used for producing good children in married life. So why is Krishna telling that he is only good things? Then who is creating bad things in this world? So this is very good question. So actually that is why Lord Krishna is describing here even ignorance that is also coming from me. But I am not under control of mode of ignorance. Just like the king sets up jail but the king does not become part of jail. In a similar fashion some people tell oh Lord Krishna came here, he had to also suffer from bad karma and he had to suffer from curses and he had to die. No, all these are leela's pastimes like a dramatic actor. In this way Lord Krishna behaves like an ordinary living entity. Just to bewilder the people who don't want to believe in God. Because there are some people who don't want to believe. So Krishna creates such situation. Otherwise here Krishna is explained good things are coming from Krishna as well as bad things are also coming from Krishna. But generally we appreciate good things. So whenever we see any good thing we should immediately able to remember Krishna. Oh. This is also from Krishna. But good and bad everything is from Krishna. So next question can be if good and bad everything Krishna has created why Krishna has created so much suffering? Prabhu. Why? I'm suffering. Why so much harassment? I want to advance in Krishna consciousness. So all the living entities so much suffering, why Krishna has given if he is the father? So the answer is so Krishna has not created enjoyment or suffering. As we discussed previously. Just like Pulis, pulis is bad or good. So Pulis is good for good and Pulis is bad for a bad person. In a similar fashion Krishna's all energies are spiritual, completely spiritual. But the same energy behaves as illusory energy and creates suffering for the people who are bad. Just like the police will create lot of suffering for the people who are bad and police will avoid suffering for the people who are good. In a similar fashion there is nothing bad in this world from absolute platform. Thus nothing bad emanates from Krishna. So for us there is distinction. This is Satvoguna rajoguna. This is Tamaguna. This is good. This is bad. On pure devotional platform for pure devotee everything is good. That is why Vishwam poonam sukhayate. So that is why we have to realize if I am suffering at this moment all the suffering is because I am bad. I am a criminal. Criminal continues to suffer. So as soon as I become good then there is no suffering in my life. Just like we approach a doctor doctor, please tell me what wrong I have done? Why am I suffering? So doctor will tell oh you have not seen the sun there is lack of vitamin D in your body do this oh there is lack of this insulin in your body so you're getting diabetes. Please take something, do something to improve that. Oh there is this problem in the body, this deficiency is there and it will try to fill up. So in a similar fashion we should understand why am I suffering? The creation is a beautiful design. The designer there should be some reason in the design why the suffering is coming to me. So this human being is required. This is called civilization Prabhupada civilization means peacefully sitting and thinking why am I suffering, what is the cause, what law I am breaking that I am suffering here? So definitely I'm breaking some law. As soon as we stop breaking the laws there won't be any suffering. So why my suffering is continuing? So for pure devotee everything is good and for a materialist everything is bad. There is nothing good for a materialist bad is anyway bad. So sometimes the materialist is suffering here hankering for the things and thinking that oh if I get this thing I will enjoy. And just to fulfill that desire he is undergoing tremendous suffering and hard work that is anyway suffering and sometimes when he gets those material opulences or what he desires that is also suffering. Because that will create more misery for him. Because anyway he will not be satisfied. Noonam Pramata kurutavi Karma by whatever is attained in this material world just like a sweet poison bitter poison is actually good. Because if it is bitter person will discontinue taking it. But if the poison is sweet, person may continue taking it and thus finish himself. So in a similar fashion sense gratification is sweet poison. Living entity continues enjoying and this enjoyment is creating many more sufferings for the living entity. So he's never satisfied. He breaks the laws of nature and thus he creates sinful activities and the suffering comes to him. So in this manner for a materialist everything is bad. Either his suffering or that enjoyment which he is having that enjoyment will lead to suffering. As Krishna mentions in fifth chapter 22nd of Bhagavad Gita 22nd verse Dukhayonaya Avatay so this we should understand if we are planning I should enjoy in life and I am taking suffering to that end. So we should understand now I am suffering and that enjoyment will create more suffering for me. So what I should desire is solve this problem. That problem can be solved by becoming a spiritualist elevating oneself to spiritual platform on material platform there is only suffering. Enjoyment will create suffering. Krishna is telling. So on material platform if we are enjoying we should be scared. That is why Krishna tells Nathu Ramate Buddha intelligent person does not enjoy material happiness because Dukkha YONAYA evate it generates dukha the material enjoyment. And for a pure devotee pure devotee everything is good, everything is spiritual. Spiritual means which is connected to absolute spirit Krishna which reminds you of Krishna. So when the pure devotee is having material opulences those opulences don't create misery for him. Because he does not enjoy those opulences. He understands there is no enjoyment uses that for the service of Krishna. And if there is suffering for a pure devotee, so called suffering so that suffering is he does not suffer. But in that suffering also he relishes transcendental pleasure. Just like a mother lifting the child on the lap. Although there is pain in the arms but she is having pleasure of the heart. In a similar fashion although there could be disturbance in the mind and body of pure devotee that appears to be action of three modes of nature. That is not the action of three modes of nature that is helping pure devotee to come closer to Krishna to always remember Krishna. So that is why this is a great tapasya. The suffering which is endured at physical and mental level by the pure devotee. And these are not the influence. The pure devotee is also sleeping. Why pure devotee should sleep at all? So it depends upon pure devotee. If he wishes he can remain always awake or if he wishes he can sleep. But when the pure devotee is sleeping, that sleep is actually Samadhi. NAN Maharaj was sleeping. Yashoda Maya was sleeping. Other pandavas were sleeping. They are all eternal associates of Krishna means completely liberated souls. They also incarnate. Just like Krishna Incarnates. Krishna comes with his close devotees, close associates. So the Pandavas and all these Rajivasis, they always incarnate with Krishna. Eternal associates they are. So these people also are sleeping. So means they are under Tamuguna. No, they are not under Tamuguna at all. So just like a Yogi is there ashtang Yogi who's sitting and is completely undisturbed. Dhru Maharaj is standing on one leg and Maharaj is not eating. He has not eaten for many many days. So the design of bodies body should feel very hungry if somebody has not eaten. And he has not even taken breath for a month. If you don't breathe, you should suffer. There is a design of this body. But he is beyond. He has surpassed the laws of nature which control the body. That is called samadhi. The body has been eaten away by the ants of the great sages. But the sage is in Samadhi. He is not at all disturbed by what is happening at the external level. Prahlad Maharaj put in boiling oil. No disturbance. He is in Samadhi. This is called Samadhi state. They are not aware what is happening on the external platform. They are completely absorbed. Just like Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu also was sleeping. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu also was fainting. He is Supreme Lord. Why Lord is sleeping? No, that is called yoga. Nidra. Our Nidra is Maya Nidra which makes us forgetful of reality. Yog Nidra means Nidra under the influence of Yogmaya which connects us to Krishna. Yoga so this Nidra connects us to Krishna. Devotee completely is ignorant of what is happening at the gross level. He's completely situated within just like Haridas Thakur. When they requested him, the people who were beating him with whips because they were given order please kill Haridas Thakur and they got disturbed when despite their best attempts, he is not dying. Rather Haridas thakur is not affected. This is called samadhi. So for Ashtang Yogi samadhi is very difficult. Samadhi is happening when a person is absorbed in the thoughts of Krishna. So soul gets so much happiness. Soul completely becomes aloof from the happenings of mind and body. So for Ashtang Yogi. He has no love for Krishna. So that is why he has to cut off all the material influences. He should not eat, should not wash, sit firmly, don't shake your body. Otherwise there would be disturbance in absorption. But devotee of Krishna, he is loving Krishna. So whatever he is doing, he is walking, talking he's absorbed always in Samadhi Haridas Thakur was walking, he was being beaten. But because he was in Samadhi he was not at all disturbed. So they got disturbed. What should I do? Please tell us. So our master will think that we have not punished you enough and he will kill us. So please help me. You are a great soul. Please save us. Otherwise master will kill us. So Haridas Thakur told no problem, I will help you. And then Haridas Das Thakur, he went into Samadhi. And then they thought, oh, he has left his body. He has died. And his body was taken to the king, Muslim king. And he became very happy. Yes, I am successful. I've killed this person. He was a Muslim. He was chanting Krishna's name. This is the right punishment for him. Throw him in the water. And then he was thrown in the water. After three days Haridas Thakur was walking again. So in this way pure devotee is completely in oblivion of what is happening externally. Because he is completely absorbed in thoughts of Krishna. So when a pure devotee is sleeping, we should not think, oh, he is not sufficiently advanced. He's sleeping for 4 hours 5 hours. Pure devotee can be sleeping for three days also. Thus it is told vaishnavira Kriya Mudra Vigehana Bhujaya so for a normal spiritualist he has to minimize all the bodily activities. But a pure devotee, he can do any activity. He can be eating eating and he can do overeating also. Because when he's eating he's completely absorbed in relishing the spiritual taste of Prasadam. This is coming from Krishna. When he's sleeping, he can continue sleeping also for a long time. So these are all transcendental activities of a pure devotee. However, we should not imitate. We should minimize, cut down, have a simple life. So pure devotee, when especially he is acharya he behaves in a satvic way so that people can be guided properly. However, Nithy siddha pure. Devotee Paramhansa externally his activities may appear to be like a madman. Just like Rishav deva smearing stool over his body. Mad people do all these activities. But he is doing all these activities because he's in complete absorption in thoughts of Krishna. So thus when the pure devotees appearing to be in great tamuguna, completely unconscious or sleeping, they are not unconscious, they are supremely conscious of Krishna. And that is called Samadhi not at all disturbed by the gross energies completely absorbed in the thoughts of Krishna. So thus we should not do a mistake of judging avaishnava. But understand vaishnava should be judged not by the eyes but by the ears. Understand what he's talking. So Krishna supreme personality we discussed in previous session or his pure devotees should be seen by the ears, should be seen by philosophy. That is why philosophy is called Darshan Shastra. Darshan means to see. So unless somebody is philosopher, he cannot see actually reality in this world. So philosophy is very much required for seeing truth. So thus hearing philosophy is very important. So when we hear philosophy, we can understand what is truth of this life. So thus for a pure devotee, actually there is no suffering. Body can be appearing to be in the mode of goodness, passion or ignorance. Oh devotee is very passionate. He's passionate raising money, building huge buildings, skyscraper, temples. And no, that is not passion. So that is pure devotion. So thus the crux is devotee and non devotee. Externally life may appear to be the same but there is gulf of difference. Pure devotee is relishing every moment of his life. And a materialist is suffering. Whether in good so called whether he is having some enjoyment in his life or is suffering actually he's suffering only always. So how to come out of this suffering? And Krishna is telling here he has declared Mama Maya Duratyaya Devi gunumai. Mamamaya duratya devi means transcendental. Why material world is also called Devi because it is controlled of. It is under control of Krishna, the supreme Spirit. So it is also called Devi. Devi. Hiyesha. Gunamay. Mamumaya durataya Gunamay. Guna means these modes. Gunamai means material energies. Having these three modes and duratyaya, it is very very difficult to conquer. But what is the solution? How to surpass this influence? Helplessly we are getting carried away by various desires and suffering. To attain those desires and creating more suffering by enjoying those desires, how to come out of this loop? So Krishna gives solution. Mama Vapadyante Mayam Etam Tarantite this divine energy of mine consisting of three modes of material nature is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto me can easily cross beyond it. So we are superior energy and ordinarily inferior energy. Krishna has told Apara material energy is inferior. It is dead and we are alive full of consciousness. So ordinarily something which is dead should easily come under control. That is common sense. And this is what is impelling so many scientists and philosophers and motivators to make our life happy. They think matter is dead. I can figure out what are the laws which matter follows and thus become happy. But they cannot understand this first word of this loca bhagavad gita that this energy is also transcendental. This is devi. This is under control. Maya Adhyakshena prakriti, this matter although it is dead, it is not independent maya adhyakshena. It operates under my supervision. So Krishna is controlling directing this energy. Thus it is duratyaya difficult to overcome. Had it been dead, human beings by their advancement of knowledge being superior conscious they would have gained control and become happy. But the laws of nature are punishing living entities every day. And depression distress is increasing. Because it is under control of Krishna. The more living entities commit sin the more this matter will create suffering for such living entities. However, solution is also very very simple. Krishna tells Mama prapadhyante, surrender unto me. It is common sense. As soon as you surrender unto king or the government there won't be punishment. You follow the laws. There won't be any punishment. As long as we do not surrender, there is punishment in our life. Lord Krishna has explained very simple solution. And we also should understand. We should stop making such plans and thinking that I will become happy someday by creating some enjoyment in my life. No, that enjoyment will create further troubles. So in order to become happy in life in order to surpass experience freedom in life no desires are disturbing. If there is no desire. There is no need of taking so much anxiety to fulfill those desires. You are getting a pleasure which you cannot get by fulfilling also all those desires which give but temporary relief from the misery. So that stage is possible when a person surrenders completely unto Krishna and when a person can surrender completely unto Krishna. So that is a very valid question. So Prabhupada explains. How long does it take to surrender people? Asks Prabhu. Understood, I have to surrender to Krishna. Will I be able to surrender in this life? Is it written in my kundali? When will I surrender or is there some time required till I can attain this perfection of Krishna consciousness? How long does it take? So Prabhupada explains very beautifully. Prabhupada explains in one of the lectures only on this verse that it requires relative intelligence. Everything this world is relative. Law of relativity. That is scientific professor Einstein's theory. Law of relativity. So one can become immediately Krishna conscious within a second and one cannot become Krishna conscious after many many births. So it is relative. If you have got sufficient intelligence, you can accept it immediately. If there is less intelligence, then it will take time. You cannot say that it will be possible after so many years. That cannot be said. It is relative. Everything is relative. For a human being from here to here. One step. And for a small microbe it is 10 miles from here to here. 10 miles for him. So everything is relative. This world is relative world. There is no such formula that one can be Krishna conscious after so many years. No, there is no such formula. One cannot become Krishna conscious even after millions of births. And one can become within a second Krishna conscious. So everything is relative. How fast? Just like a small microbe. If it has to advance a distance of few of our footsteps for him it is many many miles. It will take a long time. But human beings can travel very fast. And there are living entities in this world. Compared to them we are like microbes. So it is relative materially. How much distance we will cover spiritually how much distance we will cover? It is all relative. So one can become even within a second Krishna conscious. If somebody is intelligent that I have to surrender to Krishna. Krishna is supreme person. Everything is under his control. What am I waiting for? And how there can be any loss in my life if I surrender to Krishna. All the energy is under Krishna's control. So where is the difficulty? But the difficulty is we are not able to make such advancement. We are not able to come to such conclusions. Such perfect knowledge. So how such knowledge we can get. So that quickly we can surrender to Krishna. So again Srila Prabhupada explains in the lecture pratyaksh Avagamam Dharmyam just like you are suffering, you are hungry. If actually nutritious food stuff is given to you when you eat, you understand. Yes, I'm getting strength. My hunger is being satisfied. This is also like that. If you take to chanting, you will feel yes, I am getting strength. My misgivings are being moved in this way. You go on. Go on. Go on. The perfect stage will come. It may take little more time or it may come quickly. So Prabhupada is telling. We wonder whether I'm advancing in my life. Actually we will feel advancement. Pratyakshava gamam dharmyam. This is our process. Ashtanga yoga. You cannot understand. You are advancing. To what level have you advanced in other process we cannot understand. But this process which we are following, it is pratyakshawagamam dharmyam susukam Khartum avyayam. It is very very pleasant to perform. And Pratyaksha pratyaksha means with the senses. We can understand that I'm advancing. Example given is Shud apayonughasam. Just like when a person is, his hunger is satiated. He understands. Oh yes, I was suffering from hunger. Now I am not suffering. I am satisfied. Now I have got strength. I am getting taste while eating food. So in this fashion living entity we realize I will get taste in spiritual life. Spiritual life would be so much pleasant. And pleasure will keep on increasing in our life. And material energy will act less powerfully, less and less powerfully upon us. We will get strength by this we will understand. Yes, I'm advancing on this path. But Srila Prabhupada explains the perfect stage will come. It may take little more time or it may come quickly. So some people can very quickly realize it. Some people may take some more time. That depends on what Prabhupada explains. That depends on my relative endeavor. So this is a very great news for all of us. That depends on our endeavor. So we are free. How muchEVER I want, I can put endeavor and I can advance. There is no stopping. So that is why here Lord Krishna has mentioned you surrender unto Me. But surrenderance unto Krishna is not possible unless we understand. We have firm faith that Krishna is supreme personality. So to develop this faith it takes many many lives ordinarily so to develop such intelligence a person has to do research, persist with his research and after many many lives when he's very pure, very satvic then he meets a pure devotee who has knowledge of Krishna. He is able to get this intelligence and then he surrenders to Krishna. Very long process. However, if somebody becomes intelligent by directly engaging in devotional service that is why Lord Krishna explains here he has mentioned surrender. By this you can surpass material energy. So these three modes which Krishna has given just little brief in these three verses Krishna will explain in the 14th chapter of Bhagavad Gita which is dedicated for three modes of nature. So in that 14th chapter, verse number 26, lord Krishna explains mam chayo vyabicharana bhakti yogena sevate Sagunan samtitiyaitan brahma bhuyaya kalpate. So how a person can surpass three modes? Here Krishna writes surrender. In 14 chapter Lord Krishna mentions AVYA Bicharana Bhakti yogena sevate one who engages in my service without any deviation aviabhi Charana Bhakti Sagunan Samtiti he is able to cross beyond the modes. So the understanding is that is why in fourth chapter we saw Lord Krishna is mentioning Pranipatain pari prashnan is sevaya. There is inquiry. But inquiry is in between surrender and seva. Then inquiries would be meaningful and a person will understand. So pranipatain, humility, surrender and seva, these are important. So by doing seva a person is progressively advancing in his pranipath also in his surrender also. Because when we do endeavor, when we do seva engage ourselves in service krishna reveals Himself. Krishna is simply waiting for the servant attitude. The more a person renders service, the more Krishna reveals himself. And the more Krishna reveals himself, the more a person develops faith, the more he's able to surrender. So all of you were chanting initially less rounds initially just you are surrendering your Wednesday and Saturday time. Then you surrendered more time every day you started hearing the lectures, Prabhupada lectures, reading books. Then you started chanting more rounds. In this way surrender is increasing. Then you started just taking prasadam, not taking anything from outside. Surrender is increasing. Then you are sleeping early, getting up also early. There is more surrender. More and more we are following the rules and regulations because we are understanding this is truth, this is fact. So the more we do seva, the more Krishna reveals himself and the more we are able to surrender. So Prabhupada's ordinarily it is not possible to surrender to Krishna immediately, but if we engage ourselves in service of Krishna, krishna reveals himself and when he reveals himself completely, a devotee also surrenders completely. So thus it depends on our relative endeavor. So this endeavor is very, very important. We have to engage ourselves practically using our intelligence in putting endeavor, in engaging ourselves in seva. When we do seva, then there is a revelation and then there is surrender. And by surrender, as Krishna tells mama avaya prapadhyante by surrendering only unto me maya Mehtam tarantite person surpasses so person cannot surpass the influence of these three modes and suffering. By surrendering to our employer, by surrendering to some government, by surrendering to some theoretical or scientific theories, knowledge, by surrendering to money, by surrendering to anything, by surrendering to any other devtas lord Shiva also tells I cannot give liberation. Mukti pradata sarvesha Vishnu, avana sanchayaha mukti pradata. The giver of liberation to all is Vishnu. There is no doubt in it. This is what Lord Shiva is telling. So the greatest demigod has also told so that is why Krishna is telling ma'am eva only unto me. Ma'am, only unto me you surrender. I can only give you liberation. Rest. Everyone is under influence of energy. I am not under influence of any energy because I am master of these energies. These energies are coming from me. Lord Krishna is declaring so I request all of you please put endeavor, very good endeavor. Material advancement we have realized it gives temporary result and long term misery. So put endeavor. It is all about relative endeavor. The more we push, the more we push lovingly, with consciousness, with hard work, the more there is revelation. And very easily we can surpass the three modes of nature. So with this we will end. And now we will practically engage ourselves in service of Krishna by following the most powerful and the first step of seva of Krishna. And that is thou chanting the holy names of Krishna. So let us chant the Hare Krishna from home."