"Kamaista Gyana Prapadhyantevata TamTam Nyamastaya Prakrityaniyatasvaya translation those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to their own natures. Srila Prabhupada explains those who are freed from all material contaminations surrender unto the Supreme Lord and engage in his devotional service. As long as the material contamination is not completely washed off, they are by nature nondivotees. But even those who have material desires and who resort to the Supreme Lord are not so much attracted by the external nature. Because of approaching the right goal they soon become free from all material lust. In the Srimad Bhagavatam it is recommended that whether one is free from all material desires or is full of material desires or desires liberation from material contamination or is a pure devotee and has no desire for material sense gratification he should in all cases surrender to Vasudev and worship Him. So very important shloka. This shloka is quoted by the Islamic preacher who is very famous dr. Zakir Naik. And then he tells C in the Bhagavad Gita it is written we should not do idol worship. And Kama istarityana prapadhyanya devata. Those who are foolish, they take to idol worship. Their Bhagavad Gita is telling and everybody is doing that. So they don't know even their own scripture. Bhagavad Gita is quoting but it is unfortunate that we do not even have the basic knowledge of Sanskrit. Otherwise anybody can take the direct meaning out from the Shloka. So here it is mentioned kama is Tai stai rita Gyana gyan means knowledge. Rita Gyana means the knowledge is taken away. It has become distorted. By what? Kamai. Kam means desire. Which kind of desire? Any kind of desire of personal enjoyment. Kama is Thai stai. Rita gyana prapadhyante. Anya devata prapadhyante means surrender. So there are various devatas. Not that idol worship is discouraged here. Worship or surrendering to other Devatas is recommended here. So Krishna is not telling to any Devata don't worship any Devata. No. Anya devata. Krishna is telling before this loga. Krishna is telling vasudeva sarvamiti samahatma suduralabha bahunam janmana mante gyanvan mam prapadhyante a person who is in knowledge So if you want to do research about God then there are various levels in which God is realized. So Srila Prabhupada explains we all have practical realization of this when we go up in the plane and suppose it is very bright in the sky so we will not be able to see anything but bright sunshine. And even now if you look up at the daytime we will not be able to see even the shape of the sun itself. So we'll just see very bright dazzling sunlight. And then if the plane is going high up in there we think oh, the plane is merging into the sky. We don't see any of the other stars and we just see the sky is full of light. In a similar fashion, when the Yogis they want to approach towards God. So it begins with the process of gyana. They get knowledge that I am not body, I am spirit, soul. They advance higher, then they get dazzled by this light which is emanating from Krishna brahmanohi pratishtaham. So material world is world full of darkness. Spiritual world is world full of light. As Krishna has mentioned previously. Natad bhasyat suryo NA Shashanko NA pavakah my abode is not illuminated by the sun, moon or electricity, fire. Everything is self effulgent here, sun is self effulgent there, every planet is self effulgent and every person is self effulgent. So Brahmanohi pratishtaham that dazzling light which is there everywhere. So now we are living confined by the boundaries of this universe. That is why we experience darkness here. So it is explained in the Vedic literature. When you cross the boundaries of the universe, there is dazzling light everywhere. So that is called realization of Brahmajyoti. And just like a person, by limited vision, he is thinking everything is light. But that is not the fact. There are varieties, but varieties get covered in light. And when the yogi advances further, then he's able to understand next realization. He realizes the form of God beyond the dazzling light. Just like not always we are dazzled by the sunlight, but we are able to perceive sun. And although sun is located in one place, but we situated in different countries, different cities, are all able to perceive the sun in a similar fashion. Although Krishna is situated in one place, but he's perceived in all the hearts of the living entities and not just heart, within every atom, also he's present. So this feature is called paramatma feature andantarasta paramanu chayantarastam. So when we advance further, then we realize oh, God is present in my heart, I am Atma and he's paramatma. He's present in everybody's heart. So this is next level of realization. And then further, when devotee advances, he is able to understand bhagawan, the source of paramatma is supreme personality of Godhead. And then he understands his personal activities, personal features, qualities, everything is known to him. So this is a gradual process. And Lord Krishna tells it takes many, many births of endeavor. So if you want to do experiment, we want to do research work, what is God, then we have to go through this gradual process and we have to continue. Just like you have to continue your education to finish your graduation or PhD or whatever you want to do in between. If you drop out, you will not get degree. Even though you have spent many, many years, one year, one month before you are going to finish, you drop out, you will not get the degree. So in such a fashion, life after life, a person has to continue the rigor of searching the absolute truth, searching God. Then after many, many lies. Bahunam Janma Namante Gyani Philosopher such a researcher will be able to understand God if he persists. The subject matter of God is most difficult. He is origin of everything. However, this realization is made possible very very easy. If we take direct knowledge from God Himself. Just like if you get somebody's research paper now it is very difficult. Everything is online. Otherwise if you copy from somebody and publish it, then immediately you're successful. And otherwise if you regularly do research on a new subject, it may take many years. But if you copy, it becomes very easy. In a similar fashion, here Krishna has given perfect knowledge what you are going to realize after many many bursts of research. So some people who are able to have, who are very fortunate, who take the direct instructions from Krishna and they realize ultimately I have to surrender to Krishna. Krishna is declaring I am God and all the other people who have done research on this path, as Arjuna told when Krishna declared this thing arjuna told yes Krishna, actually you are telling this thing. And ASIto Devalo Vyasa ahustwam Rishaya survey Devarshir Naradastata all the Rishis they also speak the same thing. Devarshi Narad, the topmost Rishi, asith Deval Vyas, all of them Ved Vyas who has compiled all the Vedas, they all are speaking the same truth about you. So there is no difficulty in accepting. So all the spiritual scientists are accepting that Krishna is God. And Krishna himself is declaring that I am God and no other Devta declares that I am God. You will not find anywhere that any Devta is telling. Like Krishna declares here maam Akam Sharanam Raja, surrender only unto me ahamtwam Sarvape Bhyo, I will free you from all the sins no other Devata has declared. So the devotees ask that prabhu, I am devotee of this God or that Goddess. So should I do it? So I tell them you please ask your God and Goddess are they telling you please worship me. Never do they tell that you worship Me and you will be freed from all the sinful reactions of the past. That nobody tells surrender only unto me aham Sarvaste Prabhavo, Matta Sarvam Pravartate I am the source of all manifestations. From me everything is emanating. This nobody declares. So Krishna is declaring that I am God and there is no competitor. No other God has declared Devta or Devi that I am Supreme Lord. Krishna tells do that I am Supreme Lord. Nobody is beyond me. Matah, Partaram, NA, Anyat, Kenchi, Dastidhananjaya and all the saint sages, they are giving the same conclusion. So if a person is wise, he is able to put faith by this analysis and he surrenders to Krishna, follows the instruction, starts worshipping Him, engaging in his service, then God realization becomes very easy. If he surrenders immediately, immediately he can realize God. But if you want to do experiment, want to practically realize, then it is a journey of many many births. Provided a person is able to persist. So this is the ultimate aim of all the Vedic knowledge to understand Krishna and surrender unto him. Just like if you surrender unto king, follow the king completely, then you are law abiding citizen. Then police will not punish you. We are happy. So the question may be asked that if surrendering to Krishna only is the aim of all the Vedic literature as Krishna has told veda is chasarvaya aham ava Vedyo. From all the Vedas I am to be known. Then why vedas describe worshipping? Other devatas, especially worship of Krishna is less mentioned also that is also mentioned in the Vedas. But other devatas and other worships you'll find so much especially in the Vedic literatures. So why is that? So that Krishna is answering here in this verse kama ISTA istarithyana prapadhyante anya devata. Not everyone is free of the material contamination. So these various desires we develop because of the contamination of the heart. Just like the desire to scratch that sore eczema sore on the body comes because of impurity of blood. Then the sore develops on the body and we desire oh, let me scratch it. It is itching very much, it is disturbing. And when you do it, then the sore goes worse and the suffering increases in a similar fashion. Why we are suffering? Actually what is the cause of suffering? We have some desires. And when the desires are not fulfilled, then we suffer. We are anxious to fulfill it. And when we get it, we are anxious to protect it. And ultimately by force of time what we have attained it will go away. Or we'll be taken away from that thing. Then we lament. So anxiety, fear, lamentation this is the part and parcel of material desire. Now suppose you do not have desire only for that thing. Then you are happy. There is no problem. But we are helpless. Desires do come. Why? It comes because of this impurity. Just like impurity of blood give rises to that itching sensation and we develop desire to scratch it. This desire to scratch the sore is coming because of the impurity of blood. Otherwise this desire is not there and this desire is there. You cannot control only. And then you scratch. And then the sore increases and then you keep on suffering. So this is very vicious cycle of this material world. So not everyone is pure in the heart. So those who are not pure, they have such material desires. So to fulfill those desires, just like a child has desire to play and there is a play school. He is not immediately made to study. So that he develops habit to come to school. And the purpose of school is not to make him play. But the first standard is just playing. He goes to school just to play and do nothing else. He thinks oh, school is very nice place, I go there to play. So let me go there every day. And slowly they will introduce him to study and he'll forget all play. So this is the purpose of the Vedic literature. We have material desires and we cannot give it up. So there are various worships recommended of various devtas. Just like the play school is meant for the foolish child. A wise child who knows he will go to school to study. A grown up child. But for small kids, unintelligent people play school. You go to play in a similar fashion. Karma. Those who are unintelligent, they don't understand the science that without serving Krishna, how can I be happy? It is a simple science. Without putting food in the stomach, how can finger be happy directly? So I am planning entire life. My happiness, my happiness. Never I think how to satisfy Krishna. So if I don't think about satisfying Krishna, don't work to satisfy Krishna satisfaction is impossible in the life. This is spiritual dynamics. So those people who are not aware of these laws less intelligent. Just like play school vedas introduce this level to them. You do worship other devtas but if you are doing that you read Bhagavad Gita. It is mentioned. Kama is Tayista Hritha Gyana. You cannot call yourself an intelligent man or a wise man whose minds are distorted by material desire. So anybody who's worshipping other devtas, their minds are distorted. TamTam Niyamamastaya, Prakratya Niyatasvaya so everyone is having their own nature. Some people are very very Tamsik. So just like we see Tamsik people have various desires. So that is why some very dark worship, aghori kind of worship is recommended to them. And they are feeling very lusty and they will create disturbance in society. So some recommendations are there. You do that with a dead body, there won't be disturbance in society. And other things are there. So Tamsik worship and Kal Bharav chandi all these ghastly features horrible features are there. And obviously they are taken by the great Vaishnavas only Mother Durga, Lord Shiva. They take such features or sometimes they do some other worships. So all these worships are there of ghastly forms. These are meant for the most ignorant people. And when they rise above then other than Ganpati is there, lord Shiva is there, Brahma is there. So they worship these other forms. And those who are Satvic, they worship Lord Vishnu. Thus the puranas are of three categories. Tamsik Puran, Rajasik Puran and Satvik puran total 18 six in each segment. Just like pre primary level. Primary level and high school is there in a similar fashion. Tam sikh people cannot take to Vishnu worship. Vishnu worship. These people are not carried away much by the material desires. Although sometimes they do, they get purified. So not everyone can come to that platform. And some people are there who want to eat meat, who want to drink wine. So there is process in the Vedas that you do Satramani yajna and then you can drink also you do another yajna. You go to Kali temple and on the day of dark moon you can go there once in a month. Outside the city you can sacrifice less significant animals like goat. And the place should be so situated. Nobody should hear the cry of goat when it is being killed. Many rules and regulations are there like that so that it does not become a general culture. Oh. He is eating this hamburger, let me also see if it is good. No, outside the cities some people cannot control he was animal in previous life, he cannot immediately leave it. So in order to help them, just like we have rehabilitation camp small doses of drugs are given so that gradually they can come out of this addiction. So these rules and regulations are mentioned in the Vedas. So Vedic culture also allows meat eating intoxication for the lower people shudras who never go to school gurukul and like that. So by doing this thing they can gradually give up. So these various ghastly forms are there for Tamsik worshippers then Rajasic worshippers and those who are having very less material desires or no material desires for them worship of Lord Vishnu satsik people, that is recommended. So anybody who's worshipping other devatas apart from Krishna or Krishna's expansion lord Ram Chandra Vishnu Varaha nursing Dev so here Krishna is declaring clearly he is Hritha gana mind is distorted. And they follow particular rules and regulations of worship according to their own natures. Different people have different natures. Thus different kind of worship is recommended. So that at least they start following and they surrender to Vedas. And once they worship the particular devatas they will see I am getting result. So they will develop faith in the Vedas. And once the faith in Vedas they have developed they will start following it more rigorously. They will keep on fulfilling their desires and finally they will realize that I am not getting satisfaction. Why then Vedas mentioned why you will not be satisfied? So then finally they come to the knowledge of the upanishads they understand I am not the body and they come to Kand and they surrender unto Krishna. So because they have strong faith in Vedas and then they will realize oh, this is the ultimate worship why I'm not getting satisfied? Which is the ultimate worship which will satisfy me? They will read Lord Shiva is telling Parvati Aradhanam Sarvesham of all the worships worship of Lord Vishnu is the supreme. Then the person will think oh, let me worship Lord Vishnu now, then I'll be satisfied. So in this way all the Vedas are ultimately Krishna has declared in Bhagavad Gita veda is chasarvair aham eva Vedyo I am to be known from all the Vedas. But those who are not so wise to come to conclusion of Vedic knowledge kama ISTA sahairitha Gyana then this process is recommended. So thus if anybody meets Zakir Nayak or if any of his followers you can tell it means Anya devata other devata surrendering unto Krishna only is recommended in the Vedas. Yo yo yam yam tanum bhakta Shadha yar chitum itchati tasi tasya chalam shadham tamiham so this is even more interesting. I am in everyone's heart as super soul. As soon as one desires to worship the demigods, I make his faith steady so that he can devote himself to some particular deity. So Krishna is situated in everyone's heart. Prabhupada explains, god has given independence to everyone. Therefore, if a person desires to have material enjoyment and wants very sincerely to have such facilities from the material demigods the Supreme Lord as super soul in everyone's heart understands and gives facilities to such persons. As a Supreme Father of all living entities he does not interfere with their independence but gives all facilities so that they can fulfill their material desires. Some may ask why the all powerful God gives facilities to the living entities for enjoying this material world and so lets them fall into the trap of illusory energy. So many people ask this question. That why God has sent us here. He could have not allowed us know so that we commit mistake and we suffer in this material world. So Prabhupada answers. The answer is that if the Supreme Lord as super soul does not give such facilities then there is no meaning to independence. Therefore he gives everyone full independence whatever one likes. But his ultimate instruction we find in the Bhagavad Gita man should give up all other engagements and fully surrender unto him. That will make a man happy. So Krishna has told very clearly. Just like a father is telling child, do not listen to that man. Nobody loves you. I love you, you are my son. So he will kidnap you. He's giving you chocolate so that he can kidnap you. Don't take anything. Don't accept anything from anybody. So if child is there anything, father is envious. Why is telling only accept food from me? Why is some other person on the road? He offers chocolate every day to me. Why I cannot take it? No father knows what is the ulterior motive of that person. In a similar fashion, Lord Krishna tells here the ultimate motive of everybody in this material world is their own interest, my interest. Everyone makes relationship for their personal interest. And thus you will never be satisfied in such relationships. So God tells that is a surrender unto me. Please listen only unto me. That will make a man happy. But he being very kind, father, apart from giving the instruction, he gives full independence. Full independence. Whatever you like, you do. I have given instruction. You want to follow, you follow. Else you don't follow. So you have strong material desires. I am telling it will not satisfy you. You think it will satisfy you. Okay, I will make your faith steady in such demigod. So worship of various demigods is recommended in the vedas. If you are having poor health, you worship the sun. And if you keep yourself in the sun then diseases will get cured. That is what nature cure. Naturopathy is recommending that is nothing but derived from the vedas. So if we have disease, it is mentioned in the vedas. You just keep yourself in the sun. The more you are exposed to the sun, the less would be the disease. Now because exposure to sun is reducing that is why people are getting so many diseases. So sun is the deity for good health. And if you want to have good wife, worship Goddess OMA you want to have some heroic powers. You worship Lord Shiva. You want to have good learning, worship Saraswati. And like this various worships are recommended in the vedas. And who gives faith to that deity? Krishna only gives faith from the heart. Some people are very devoted and faithful. My Ganesha, my dear Ganesha removes all the obstacles and I'll worship him. Goddess Lakshmi, she is always there keeping her blessings upon me. I'll worship Lakshmi. So this strong faith is given by Krishna. And we cannot do anything. Neither Devatas can give any benefit. Neither we can derive anything. Krishna is present in both the hearts. So when a living entity is desiring Krishna is there in the heart. From the heart he gives knowledge. Go to this devata. He makes the faith very strong. So everyone is having some faith. Nobody's faithless. Somebody is thinking that money will make me happy. He's having strong faith. Somebody is thinking some Devata will make me happy. Somebody is thinking power or fame will make me happy. Somebody is thinking some person will make me happy. So all this faith is coming from Krishna only if you want to enjoy position, want to enjoy person, you have some desire. Krishna makes your faith steady so that you can attain that position and enjoy that thing. But Krishna declares you will never be happy by all these things. So thus we should be very careful. So we all have some particular faith. Just like somebody was debating that you will find Prabhupada mentioning few things like no, they have not gone to the moon. It is not possible to go to that planet. And it may be difficult for many to accept. However, if you see in Russia majority of the people till date they don't believe that US has gone to the moon. And the top person of Russian space agency they told we want to go to the moon only to understand, only to verify whether they actually went or not. Like that. And now the proportion is little reducing. But still more than 50% of population they believe that no, they have not gone. So thus the faith that we have a generation ago everyone is having very strong faith in the vedas. Now people faith has declined and very less people have faith. So our faith simply depends upon our exposure. People who are born in of course in our country we don't study much of the religious books. But in Islamic countries they do study nicely. And the children there, they have natural and very strong faith. Allah is everything and they are very dedicated. Devoted. You just see when there is cricket match and Indians will tell yes, I practiced well, I played well and all these things but any player from Pakistan, he will come and he will glorify God. And then by faith of God, God's mercy. May God be happy like this they would tell always just chant the name of God in whatever they are telling start with the name of God, give credits to God. And if God is merciful, if he so desires all these words they will use. So we have to understand this faith is nobody is faithless in this world. Everybody is having certain faith and that faith is given by God from the heart. So if somebody is willing to have faith in God from birth he will get such an atmosphere where he's exposed to such things and thus very easily he'll be able to put faith. Now from birth we have been exposed to few things. So it is very difficult to change our faith overnight. So Krishna is telling I make his faith steady so that he can devote himself to particular deity. So we should be very careful. So we are led by our faith. We think this is right. So that is why I am following it. But before being carried away by our faith we should understand what is my situation? Am I having material desires? If I am having material desires there is no possibility that I can develop right faith in life. It is not possible. So even though in association with devotees who have strong faith in absolute truth Krishna I may develop some rub off effect. But then as soon as association is slackened my faith will get vanished. So thus this shloka is very very important. We all will have different faiths basis our desires. Some people are faithful drinking and meat eating. That is the ultimate pleasure of life. This is what we should some other person will have different faith. So all this faith is being given by Krishna. Somebody is telling he is supreme, Ganesha is supreme, Surya is supreme or this Goddess goddess is supreme. All these faiths are money supreme. All this faith is coming from Krishna. Somebody had very strong desire. I want to become billionaires just I want wealth and nothing else in life. Krishna will make him believe very strongly that yes, money will make you successful. So that's how dangerous it is. It is the faith only which drives us in life. But that faith we need to understand what is the foundation. If I am not free from material desires then my faith is not perfect. Satya shadhaya yuktas Tasyaradhanam ihate Labade Chata Kaman Maya Vavhitanitan then Krishna mentions Satya Shadhaya yuktas endowed with such a faith shadhaya yuktaha tasyaradhanamihate he seeks favor from particular demigod and obtains his desires. But who is giving all these things? Maya Vavihitan Hitan but in actuality all these benefits are bestowed by me alone. So Krishna only has done all the arrangement. If somebody doesn't want to go to Krishna directly then Krishna gives faith in the demigod. From the heart of demigod Krishna guides please fulfill their desire that Jeeva is asking for that desire. So this all arrangement is done by Krishna only for fulfillment of our desires. But Krishna tells finally antavatu Falam Tesham Tad Bhavati Alpama Sam Devan devaya Joyanti Madhbhakta Yanti Mamapi antavatu Falam Tesham antavat means limited and so those results which are derived from the demigods they are subject to destruction. They are temporary in nature. Tad Bhavati ALPA Medasam medusa means intelligent brain substance ALPA medasa means who are dull in brain less intelligent small intelligence. Tad Bhavati ALPA Meham so Krishna is criticizing so sharply in the first Loka he told Kama istastai Rita Gyna whose intelligence is stolen by material desires minds are distorted they surrender to other Devatas. Here Krishna is again telling alpama dasa those who are less intelligent they surrender to other Devatas and attain results which are temporary in nature. Less intelligent means so solving A square plus B square is equal to C square is not intelligence. Intelligence means understanding. I am not the body, I am spirit soul. So if somebody does not understand, I am eternal. Any work spends does all the tapasya hundreds of years thousands of years for worshipping some Devata then he's foolish because you are eternal you are going to move on. This body became powerful hirankashapu became very powerful. He chased all the Devtas away but body was mortal. How much are powerful the body and mind can become you can become famous you will get the person you desire in life love of life. But then love of life will go away he will die she will die or you will die. Isn't it so separation is must so misery is must. The simple sense if it does not strike a person that is called ALPA medasa less intelligent that even though I attain that desire object that I want time will not let us remain together. So I am eternal. I'll carry on and next life there is no preparation next life you again suffer. So less intelligent people go for tempted results. An intelligent person he goes for permanent results. So many people they tell that whatever Devta you worship you can do that these are all imaginary form. This is also one theory. But this is very wrong and atheistic understanding. So as we discussed in Jagyasa you see a small or big car standing outside. You cannot but believe that it is made by somebody. It is impossible to think conceive that by evolution of chemicals over millions of years this car is standing here now. So when a car a. Simple machine cannot come by itself by mixing together of chemicals. How can this complex human body come on its own? So somebody has arranged all these wonderful machines and we also discussed each and every cell of this human body or anybody. Each and every cell is more complex than the New York City in its rush hour. So all these small cities who is creating and putting within those cells which are self replicating in nature. So thus somebody is required just like here to construct cities. People make townships, people make cities. There is JDA, development authority and other things. So in a similar fashion there are some personalities who are very very powerful and very very intelligent. They are able to create planets, create universes and create these small cells also. And such powerful somebody has to create, isn't it? Just like somebody has created car, somebody has created now Krishna God does not personally have to make all these bodies. He delegates all these tasks to other living entities. So some living entities are in charge of. Just like you have street lights, there is a department and there are roads, there is another department defense, there is another department. Electricity, water there is different in a similar fashion to control universal water, light, heat, resources different departments are given to different personalities and they are called Devatas. So anybody who can understand the simple logic that a machine cannot come on its own. So all the machines, everything requires a creator. And many many people would be there who would be taking care of this management. He can very simply understand that there are Devatas. Where is the question of imagination? But somebody who has his strong faith in the education that we have got which does not talk about God at all and bewilders living entity with various theories and about that also there is no time to think. A person mugs up right in the examination and then forgets to mug up another theory in the next class. For them it might be difficult to understand but with common sense we can understand these things. So it is very foolish to think that you worship any demigod. You worship any Devata Devi. Ultimate end result would be same here. Krishna very clearly is declaring Devan Deviyajo yanti madh bhakta yanti Mamapi. Those who worship the demigods Deviyajo Devyanti Yanti means to achieve or to go. So people who worship Devtas, they attain the planet of the Devatas. But my devotees ultimately reach my supreme planet madhakta Yanti Mamapi. So there is no need of taking some other meaning and no prabhu. Actually real interpretation is different. No, there is no need of interpreting the evidence. So the vedas are evidence. Just like the law books are there. So when somebody the law book is there. So direct interpretation of the law should be taken. That is the understanding. You cannot take the indirect meaning. So there is some evidence or somebody is giving witness that yes I saw that this man killed another man. Now you should not take the indirect interpretation. I saw this man killing another man in the drama which they did in school. I saw this man killing that man in my dream which I saw yesterday. No. Why should you interpret? Although it can mean that I saw the other man killing means that could have happened in a drama. They were both playing in a drama or the person would have seen in the dream. But what is the direct meaning? When somebody is giving such testimony it means this person killed other man. So this person killed other man in dream or in drama this interpreted meaning should not be taken. Otherwise there is no meaning of evidence. Then why you are asking when you want to take meaning out of your own thing. So that is why some people are very fond of taking out meanings of the Vedas. So Madhu Kaitabar the demons coming from the ears of Vishnu. So how from ear living entity can come? Living entity comes from the womb of the mother. So from ear means it is some actually poetic thing is mentioned here. So demon means somebody who disturbs. And the thing which is disturbing has origin in its ear. What is that thing? Yes. If somebody criticizes me that disturbs me criticism starts from the ears. So if I don't hear those criticism, those voices then I will not be disturbed. So madhu kaita means criticism and praise. And like that they speculate many people. So like this there is no need of speculating otherwise there is no use of Vedas Vedic evidence. Then everybody will take their own meaning. What is the use of reading anything then? So this Chaitanya Mahaprabhu told when some people were arguing giving twisted interpretations he told then you don't read Vedas. So evidence, law books vedas means direct meaning should be taken. So here direct meaning means Devan. Devya joyanti. Those people who worship Devtas go to Devatas. And those people who worship me, they come to my planet my supreme abode. So different result is obtained by worshipping different Devatas. Permanent result. Permanent happiness. Eternal life is attained by worshipping Krishna. And temporary life temporary results are attained by worshipping other Devatas. And Krishna tells Tad Bhavati ultima the Sam less intelligent people. They do that? They go for that. So the reason for demigod worship is not that it is encouraged. The reason is because people have different desires. Just like a child needs a play school people with material desires are directed to other demigods for fulfillment. But the science of this worship is ultimately Krishna only is arranging everything basis our desires. And the result is temporary by worshipping the Devtas. And the result is permanent satisfying full of unlimited happiness. If you worship Krishna but if somebody worships Devatas very sincerely without any material desires then Devtas also will guide him to the highest result. Just like there was this brahmana 500 years ago whom Lord Shiva sent to Sanathan Goswami. And the famous devotee nursing Mata he is reincarnation of King Muchukunda who is there in what is that place called Junagad in Gujarat. So King Muchkunda reincarnated as a nursing meta. Nursing meta is so famous as a great devotee in Gujarat. And he also did tapasya for Lord Shiva for seven days. And when Lord Shiva came he asked him please give me devotion to Lord Krishna. And then he was blessed with that. And Lord Krishna instructed him also how to preach like that. And there is another such many means, few cases because mostly people take two other demigods for material benefits. But some cases like another devotee their Chandidas. So this Chandidas was such a great poet that Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Lord Krishna himself would read literature's poems composed by Chandidas. So you must be wondering why the name is Chandi Das of a Krishna devotee who has composed Radhakrishna prayers. So actually he was devotee of Chandi before it is mentioned. So this Chandi Das was worship of Chandi god is Durga and he was having another friend who was living next to him. He was devotee of Lord Krishna. And Lord Krishna's devotees are usually poor sometimes. And the worshipper of demigods they are very very rich opulent. So because as soon as there is material opulence in this world then unless a person is sufficiently advanced in spiritual life material opulence is a great impediment. Just like if the poison is sweet it is more dangerous. So there is anyway misery in this material world. But here if you feel some sweetness, temporary sweetness you get trapped here. So the other devatas whatever they want immediately that other persons are wanting this sanction. But Krishna does not sanction unless it is beneficial for the devotee. And so that devotees remain dependent upon Krishna they advance in spiritual life. They are usually poor. So this worshipper, his neighbor, his friend he was very poor. And this Chandi Das was very rich. If you worship Goddess Durka you will get material resources. You'll be rich but you'll be suffering in a rich house. That's it suffering nobody can avoid. So he was very rich. And this person became so poor that he was not having anything one day to offer to Krishna. And then he saw his neighbor Chandidas who is very rich. He came around in the 14th century, 13th or 14th century. So Chandidas was so rich that his garden he was having many flowers, beautiful flowers. So he saw that and he desired oh this flower is so nice if I can offer this to Krishna and in the mind because you cannot go to another man's property in the mind he took that flower and then he offered it to so Krishna's worship is so nice. It is mentioned there is a system called Manas Puja also. So Krishna is so nice. He tells in your mind you worship me, I will accept. It does not matter so. Because mind is also another energy of Krishna. This gross matter is also energy of Krishna. So deity in the temple or the deity which we see in the mind in the mind if we see Krishna is coming and I am making him sit on a jewel throne I am worshipping him very nicely. So those people who cannot afford they are poor or they are in such situation they lack all these external arrangements simply in the mind we can worship Krishna. So that is also accepted perfectly. So he offered in the mind. And then that day it so happened that Chandidas the same flower which his friend offered in mind to Krishna he offered that flower to Chandi and Ma Chandi immediately when he went to the temple, she manifested herself and he told my dear Chandidas, I'm very very happy. I am very glad today by your worship. Please tell me what do you want in life? So then he was surprised that I have not done anything special today can you please tell me mother what is the reason why you are so glad today what special thing did I do? So he told today you have offered me Krishna Prasad this flowered offer to you told oh and then she explained how Krishna is supreme personality and I am her shadow carrying out the orders of creating, maintaining destroying this world. So then Chandidas, he told oh my God, he lamented. So Krishna is supreme personality. So I wasted all my time. I did not worship him. And then he told so mother, would you mind if I start worshipping? Krishna henceforth so Chandi told no I am also devotee of Lord Krishna only so I'll be more than glad so all the living entities should take shelter of Krishna only so that day onwards Chandi Das became great devotee of Lord Vishnu. And thus all the literatures that he composed, they are in the glorification of Lord Krishna and not of Chandi, who led her to worship of Lord Krishna. So in this way, somebody is attached to the devtas but does not ask any material desire which is rare. The Devatas also guide him to the Supreme Personality. But if you have material desires, they will simply give you those desires. And such people are called less intelligent. So let us realize this very important point. Although we may be having attachment to various devatas, we may be worshipping them. But we need to understand those devtas never recommend in any vedas. You worship me for ultimate happiness. Of life for freedom from birth and death. I am the ultimate source of all the creation. No other Devas will declare. You can go and search. No Devata will tell. Ahamtwam Sarpape bhyamksha ishyami I'll free from all the sins, all the sufferings. No Devata can promise that. So Devtas are not telling. Other sages are not telling. Scriptures are not telling. Scriptures are telling, krishna is telling, surrender unto me. Other sages are telling, Vedavyas is telling, so let us now surrender unto Krishna. So, as long as a person does not surrender to Krishna. So Vedas mentioned a person who does not read the Vedas and a person who follows the Vedas very, very nicely. Both are equally ignorant. Just like a person who does not go to college or a person who goes to college. Both are at the same level, unless the person is able to get a job or finish his degree. So unless that result is attained, both are equally penniless and both are suffering. So unless you get to the result of the Vedic literature, surrender to Krishna, everything else is simply illusion and waste of time. Unless we are progressing. So, if we are wise, let us immediately make our all Vedic education study, religion perfect by surrendering to Krishna, which is the version of Bhagavad Gita and all the scriptures."