Let us read all the texts, all the verses and then one by one we will see all these qualifications.
So Lord Krishna explains
Lord Krishna explains
Lord Krishna explains
So these are the qualifications.
So somebody asked Prabhupada, one of his disciples, that Prabhupada you are telling Bhakti Yoga is the topmost yoga.
But we see that yogis are performing amazing magic and it is a fact.
So if anybody tells you I am following the process of Ashtanga Yoga, Dhyana Yoga, I am following the process of Ashtanga Yoga, Dhyana Yoga.
But we see that yogis are performing amazing magic and it is a fact.
So if anybody tells you I am following the process of Ashtanga Yoga, Dhyana Yoga, then he should be able to show the powers.
He should be able to make himself smaller than the smallest or bigger than the biggest, lighter than the lightest, without any use of airplane he can fly anywhere.
So the disciple asked Prabhupada, that Prabhupada if a pure devotee, perfectionist of Bhakti Yoga has already all the achievements which people of other yogas have,
so can't you just fly to America without bothering to have a ticket and everything?
So Prabhupada explained, yes I can do that.
But if I do that, then he will stop asking me how to go to Krishna and he will ask me how to go to America without a ticket.
So that is why the pure devotees are very very careful.
Any sincere practitioner of yoga, he does not get carried away by such mystic powers which are the natural result of following the yoga process.
So if we follow the laws of nature, very nicely we get more and more freedom.
And if you break the laws of nature, then obviously it is God's arrangement.
So just like here those people who are outlaws, so they are captured by police and they are put into jail, their freedom is restricted.
And the more a person behaves in a gentlemanly way, the more he gets freedom.
In a similar fashion, the more a person breaks laws of nature, he becomes helpless like an animal.
So we all realize before we came to Krishna Consciousness, how we were also so helpless.
Or now to the degree we experience advancement in Krishna Consciousness, the helplessness reduces.
Otherwise people cannot change even a small habit in their life. So helpless they are.
So because we are breaking laws of nature, we cannot sleep on time, we cannot get up on time, we cannot control our tongue.
Daily I want that kind of food item, we cannot control our eyes, I want to see something, I cannot control my ears.
And thus all these apps, app makers, they make wonderful apps and they take advantage of this helplessness of people, lose tendency.
They cannot control their senses. People are addicted to Facebook, Instagram and now Clubhouse and so many things that is making people addicted.
So the more people break laws of nature, the more they lose their independence, they become helpless.
And eventually after they leave this body, the next life is animal who is completely helpless.
And the more we abide by the laws of nature, our senses are regulated, we are able to control our mind and senses.
So power will be given to a person who is able to control mind and senses.
So people want to become powerful, but they don't want to control their mind and senses. Then how is it possible?
So that is why when one king, he was disturbed.
So the saint asked the king, so king, are you not able to control your subjects?
Are you not able to control your mind and senses? Is that the issue?
Because unless you control your mind and senses, you cannot control anybody outside.
So the more people do tapasya, this fact was known to the people who followed the Vedic culture.
So if you have you wish to have any kind of power, then you have to perform tapasya.
And any person who performs tapasya as mentioned in the Vedas, he develops certain kind of powers, spiritual or material.
So power is given to a person who can control his mind and senses.
It is as simple as that.
So that is why the Vedic culture tells, first of all, if you want to become happy, you want to experience freedom in your life.
Why we celebrate Independence Day?
Vacation could be there on any other day or not.
But Independence Day and Republic Day or Gandhi Jayanti, these are national holidays.
Why? Because they are associated with our freedom.
We are all hankering for freedom.
But we want to enjoy freedom in a foolish way, just like the outlaws they want to enjoy.
So they want to break the laws.
And then they think if I do not follow the laws of government, then I am happy.
So this is foolishness, is it not?
Because they did not know just by little misses of independence, they will lose all their independence.
They'll be put in jail.
So in a similar fashion, our life should be very strictly regulated by the Vedas.
So many rules and regulations you will have.
You eat in this way.
You eat these things.
You do not eat these things.
Do not mix these two things.
Sleep in this way.
Get up in this way.
At this time, you take birth in this way.
You die in this way.
You marry in this way.
And so many things are there.
So many rules and regulations.
Because the Vedas train a person to become a gentleman.
So if you follow these rules and regulations nicely, then we develop powers.
And a bhakti yogi, because his mind and senses are completely under control,
he always uses his mind and senses only for Krishna's satisfaction.
So all the powers, they develop automatically.
But then they are very careful.
So spiritual masters never show.
Of course, because they are having these powers, it inevitably gets reflected here and there.
But usually they don't want to show it.
Because then those devotees who are practicing, they may always wait.
When will I get that power?
And they will not be able to advance in this process.
So when we are following bhakti yoga, it is very, very important.
We don't use this chanting of Hare Krishna Mahamantra or whatever we are doing for any material gains.
Just like now Chaturmasi has started.
So in this month, we are not supposed to take any green leafy vegetable in this manner.
In these four months, because it rains.
So those preachers earlier, the preachers would travel everywhere and preach all the sadhus.
So a sadhu is not selfish.
He dedicates his life to spread this knowledge everywhere.
But in rains, they cannot travel.
So they will stay at one place wherever in town or village they are.
And because it is raining, they would conduct discourses and bhajan, kirtan in that localized place.
And then they would follow austerity in these four months, Chaturmasi.
So Chaturmasi is usually followed because when you do austerity, then it is told.
Then you can develop various powers.
You can elevate yourself to higher planets.
Where every living entity is born with amazing mystical powers.
And the standard of living is very, very high on other planets.
So that is a mood of following Chaturmasi.
We are also following Chaturmasi.
We follow certain minimum restrictions.
But the mood is so that we can engage our senses in the service of Krishna.
So that is why Hare Krishna Mantra can remove all this pandemic.
Hare Krishna Mantra can remove all the problems from our life.
Hare Krishna can also give us all the mystical powers and everything that we want.
But if you use Hare Krishna Mantra for that, that is like using currency for boiling your tea.
No, currency notes should not be used.
You use wood, you use CNG, you use cow dung cake, but do not use currency notes.
It has got a better purpose.
In a similar fashion, if you use Hare Krishna Maha Mantra for any other ulterior motive,
then that defeats the purpose.
That motive will definitely be served because Hare Krishna has all the potency.
But we will not be able to attain the ultimate spiritual happiness, freedom from birth, death, old age and disease.
Eternal life will never be attained by that.
So that is why Prabhupada was very, very cautious that he does not display these things.
So likewise, you know, people usually so many, many saints who are not actually very saintly
and they do not actually know what is the aim of life.
Simply they do some tapasya, they get some powers.
So they come down and meet the people and they show some powers to get attracted, to get people attracted towards them.
So likewise, in our family also, we had one saint, a very famous devotee of Lord Hanuman,
and he developed some mystic powers.
So some of our uncles, they started following him and he would predict when they were coming to meet,
they told that your car break down on the way so you could not come.
And how is this thing happening in your house?
Like this, he would tell something in advance and few other things here and there he was telling.
So they surrendered.
So people are not very intelligent.
They get carried away by such powers.
And Prabhupada tells once a yogi came down and then he started displaying his powers that he can walk on water.
So everybody got fascinated.
Oh, yogi, great yogi.
And some people may call him Bhagwan also.
He's walking on water.
It is extraordinary.
Just like tribal, they surrender to any flash of light.
In a similar fashion, those people who do not know what is God, any person shows little power, they would surrender.
Oh, he's yogi, he's God.
So even Ramana also was having various powers.
All the demons also have, ghosts also have various powers.
But you cannot call them God or any other thing.
But those people who are less intelligent, they surrender.
So there was one intelligent person he told.
So you have done so many years of tapasya in the mountains and now you have got some power by which you can walk on water.
So why you have wasted your time?
You can pay two cents and you can take a boat and perform the same function of crossing the water.
So something which can be performed an activity by simply paying two cents.
Why you have to go and spend hundreds of years of tapasya?
What is the use?
So, yes, you can fly and go to any other country, but you can purchase a ticket and then also you can fly.
What is the use of wasting valuable human form of life for attaining power, which is temporary?
So many times Prabhupada was asked this question.
Swamiji, can you please show some powers?
So Prabhupada, can you show some magic?
So Prabhupada told, this is magic that hippies have become happy hippies in America who were all the born in good families, rich family, but they were lying on the street.
They were extremely disgusted.
So when Prabhupada went to America, so Americans were having a notion.
India is a poor country and there are so many troubles.
India is a land of snakes and tigers and India has diseases, malaria and all such things because they don't have malaria over there.
India, we have mosquitoes and drains.
So Prabhupada told them that, you see, you are thinking India's malaria and you're telling India is not a good place.
But then you have some other disease.
You have so many sexual diseases.
And Prabhupada told, ultimately you are not happy.
If all the success, all this wealth would have made America happy, there would not have been so many hippies.
Hippies means disgusted people.
They are living like animals, breaking all the laws.
They are dissatisfied.
So that is why America also has failed its people.
So that is why in material world, Prabhupada, just see, this is the vision of pure devotee.
Why there are hippies?
Why there is this great bunch of people, thousands and thousands in number who are dissatisfied?
So that is why distress is everywhere.
So they might be suffering from distress of malaria.
You're suffering from distress of sexually transmitted diseases and hippies and X, Y, Z.
But distress is there everywhere.
And this distress cannot be removed unless a person knows this highest magic.
What is the highest magic?
Gross magicians or yogis, they may change the configuration of matter.
They may extend their apples, their hand.
And Prabhupada told, he witnessed that somebody would come to this place and he was following a yogi.
And immediately that yogi extended his hands and brought very big apples, which you will find in Kabul or some other place.
Along with it, leaves and all, everything he was able to produce.
He told, what do you want?
We want some apples and it will go to that place, other room.
And then apples are found there.
So like this, yogis can do all these things.
They can change configuration of matter.
Matter is present here.
They can bring it here.
Your body is small.
They can make body huge.
Body is huge.
They can make it small.
They can make it light.
So they can play around with matter as modern science is also getting some cities,
just like some of you would be sitting in other country, thousands of miles away or in different states, different cities.
But how we are able to see each other, talk to each other.
So this is also a city.
Ordinary, ordinarily sound cannot travel so far.
So this change of matter is not very difficult to perform.
However, the most important magic is not the change of matter, but the change of consciousness.
And this is the real effect which Hare Krishna Mahamantra Prabhupada told has produced.
Hippies have become happy.
The people who are under great stress always as many people when they come to Krishna Consciousness,
I think all of you who have been following Krishna Consciousness for some time,
you'd have noticed people tell Prabhu, I was always stressed out.
I was in depression.
I was always.
We meet people who are always depressed and now they are always happy.
And people tell that I've never loved like this.
I've never been so happy.
So like this, we have various testimonials.
So change of consciousness, it is very, very difficult to have.
People can become very educated.
They can become magistrate ministers, but change of consciousness does not happen.
So people write big, big examinations.
They go to the top-notch institutes of the country.
And what do they do there?
Animal activities.
The radical thing which a person learns when he comes to the best institute of our country,
Technical Institute, is drinking and pornography, as told by the people.
And they were asked, what do you want to do?
So now that you have taken admission in this college and they are openly telling,
we want to enjoy this pleasure.
So this is what they want to do.
Heart has not changed.
They know A2, B2, C2, H2, N2.
But consciousness, it is degrading.
Lust and greed is increasing in the heart.
The stress and anxiety is increasing always in their lives.
So this is not the result of education.
So that is why education means matter.
Anybody can change.
That is not very extraordinary form.
So that is why it is told in the Puranas.
Ya vidya sa vimukta ye.
Knowledge means which liberates you.
Anyatha shilpanay punam.
Otherwise, it is simply art and craft.
Art and craft is also education.
In home science, you learn art and crafts.
You put this thread here, take it out, take out the needle from there.
You put this masala, put this salt.
That is also a science.
But this thing is not very advanced science.
So similarly, it is little advanced nature.
You put one chip here, take this diode out, put transistor here.
So this is also shilpanay punam, art and craft.
You are simply changing the configuration of matter.
So such education is only called shilpanay punam if it is not liberating you.
Education means ya vidya sa vimukta ye.
It should make you free.
It should set you free.
That is education.
Education should not just bring about change of matter,
but most importantly, change of consciousness.
It is a consciousness which is the most important element in this body.
When consciousness is out, then the body is of no use.
And people do not know we are actually that consciousness
is changing bodies life after life.
We are eternal.
That is why Chanakya Pandit said,
So in Vedic education system, any person who has gone to Vedic school,
what is the proof that he has undergone education?
Now we are producing big, big degrees of no use
because a person behaves and remains on animal platform.
So Chanakya Pandit says,
the most powerful academician and minister of our country,
he says,
The first symptom of education would be
except one's own wife, every other woman must be seen as mother.
So if a man except his own wife is able to see every other woman as mother,
that means he is educated.
And
materials and property of other people, wealth of other people.
Now people are very fond of taking others wealth also.
And everybody is corrupt bottom to top, almost.
There may be some exceptions, but more or less everybody is corrupt.
Judiciary is corrupt.
Legislature is anyway corrupt.
Doctors, so much corruption.
We saw how it is happening rampantly.
Doctors are having corporate targets now.
Bureaucracy corrupt.
So everywhere there is a lot of corruption.
Majority is corrupted.
Minority is sustaining somehow.
So because they are not educated, actually, they simply know arts and crafts.
They have been educated only in arts and crafts.
Had they really got education, they would have got this qualification.
Others money, others wealth, properties,
like a clod piece of stone.
And
all other living entities I perceive as myself.
If somebody is cutting my finger, I feel pain.
How can I kill harm other living entity?
This basic sense is not there and they are occupying big, big posts.
They cannot understand this sense.
And they talk about big, big words that this is soul.
This is God and all these other things.
And they're killing other living entities and eating meat.
They don't understand this common sense, which a child also can understand.
So this is our today's education system.
That a child also has some basic sense.
And that sense is also taken away.
Child also does not see other living entities getting harmed.
It cries.
So it doesn't need very advanced knowledge.
You feel pain, they also feel pain.
How you can give pain to others?
So
a person sees every other living entity as his own self.
These three criteria are sufficient.
If a person can see every other woman except one's wife as mother
and everybody else's wealth as a piece of stone
and
every other living entity as his own self.
So this is called real magic.
And it is very, very difficult.
Even though a yogi can be very, very advanced.
He can be following dhyana for a long time, just like Durvasa Muni.
Durvasa Muni was such an advanced yogi.
He could travel
the entirety of the universe within one year.
Scientists are telling it takes 40,000 light years to travel to the farthest planet of the universe.
40,000 light years.
And Durvasa Muni crisscrossed the universe in one year.
But he could not control his anger.
So consciousness, it was very difficult.
He could not change.
So thus the real change, the real magic is
if a person can change somebody's consciousness.
So thus the bhakti yogi is the most advanced magician.
Even though externally he may restrain from showing any such magical activities.
But this greatest magic, it cannot be hidden from the world.
How the consciousness of the people, it is changing.
And we have discussed many case studies from Bhagavatam of that of Mrigari and the prostitute Haridas Thakur changed overnight.
Can a prostitute come to such a level that she is now chanting 20, 23, 24 hours every day.
And immediately overnight such change has happened.
She has surpassed all the bodily needs, demands.
Jagai, Madhai and all such so many case studies we have seen.
And today also we see how people are changing their lifestyles.
Those who take sincerely to chanting of Hare Krishna.
So this is called real magic.
So thus Lord Krishna tells here, these qualifications a devotee should acquire if he needs entrance in the spiritual atmosphere.
And what are these qualifications?
The first qualification is yes, ma no dvijate loko.
Sorry, before this also, there is this shloka.
Advesta sarva bhutana maitra karuna evacha.
So material world begins with envy.
Here all the endeavors, so much hard work is happening because we are very much envious.
A person cannot see his friend or anybody progressing more than himself.
So thus I was speaking to one boy and he was from a small town.
That town became very famous because it produced country topper in one very tough examination.
So I asked, oh, you are from that town.
You know this boy.
He told, yes, he was my classmate.
And then I told, oh, he has stopped the exam.
Everybody knows him and knows your town also.
So he told, yes, but he does not have interpersonal skill.
And so immediately so he could have told any other thing.
He would have spoken a few more good qualities also.
But immediately they told something.
He does not have this thing.
So somehow we cannot accept somebody is better than me.
So this is called envy.
So thus there is a lot of competition in the society.
Any competition in the society means there is no love.
So we are talking of love.
There should be love.
There should be brotherhood.
At the same time, we are promoting competition also.
Parents are harassing their children.
Why you got one marks less?
You see your batch mate, the neighbor, he has got two marks more than you.
So, you know, we cannot tolerate.
However, if you really love a person, then you will be much more happy.
If that person goes and rather you will support him or her to go and progress much, much faster than you and more than you.
But if you are envious, you will try to pull the leg will be unhappy in their distress.
We will take happiness in their happiness will be distressed.
So first of all, we have to become non envious.
We should become happy when other person is progressing more than me.
Oh, you got better job than me.
Very nice.
So Krishna is very merciful.
Oh, you have got better health than me.
Very nice.
It is very good.
You are advancing more than me in Krishna consciousness.
You are doing better service.
So that is very nice.
Krishna is very merciful.
So there is suppose there is only one chapati available in the house and two brothers are there.
Will they fight for that resource or they would like to offer the other person?
So this is called love and opposite is envy.
So that is why in such a competitive that is why devotee does not get carried away by such competition.
He works only to maintain his body and soul together.
And it is easy to remain non envious from a person who is neutral to us or our friend.
Of course, in friends also we have tremendous any envy.
However, devotee is much more advanced, so much advanced that he does not envy even his enemy.
That is why next qualification is maitra karuna evacha.
He is friendly to everybody.
He does not envy even his enemy.
And the typical example which we all know is Lord Jesus Christ and Haridas Thakur.
These are extraordinary examples.
Both Jesus Christ and Haridas Thakur, they were given so much of physical harassment,
persecution, and they were praying ardently for the people who were persecuting them.
So who can do that?
Somebody is trying to kill us and killing us.
And without any heart, they are beating us so that we can die.
Can we pray for that person who is trying to kill us?
We can never.
We would be praying that Krishna, please kill this person.
He is harming me.
But this is the nature of devotee.
A person is coming to kill us.
Also, the devotee praise devotee acts.
This is the extraordinary character that only a devotee can possess.
He is non envious even of his enemy.
But why?
How he is able to develop such consciousness?
So that is why Bhagavad Gita is so much full of treasure of all such knowledge.
So Srila Prabhupada explains, what is the consciousness of a devotee?
This is what Mother Sita also explains.
So Srila Prabhupada explains, what is the consciousness of a devotee?
This is what Mother Sita also told to Hanuman.
When Lord Hanuman went to rescue Mother Sita in Ashoka Vatika, he told,
let me beat all these witches.
They would have harmed you so much.
So Mother Sita told this thing.
Nor does a devotee become his enemy's enemy.
He thinks that one is acting as his enemy due to his own past misdeeds.
Thus, it is better to suffer than to protest.
So this point is very very important to understand.
Nothing happens by chance because everything is in control of God.
And God is all perfect.
Nobody can enjoy for no reason.
Nobody can suffer without any reason.
So if anybody is enjoying or suffering, it is only due to our past misdeeds.
If a person's karma is very good, he will go there on some higher planets.
Maharloka, Janloka, Tapaloka, Satyaloka.
Even when other planets of the universe are destroyed,
they don't feel any disturbance.
There is no enmity at all.
The demons, they can go up to Swargloka.
But higher than that, demons also have no entry.
So in Maharloka, Janloka, it is reserved for those people who are renunciants,
who just want to advance in spiritual life.
So there, there is hardly any disturbance.
No demons have got entry into such locations.
But if a person has bad karma, then he will face many enemies.
Very bad karma, he will face many many enemies.
So thus, if anybody is acting as my enemy, it is only because of my past karma.
This poor fellow is simply an instrument.
So just like police acts as somebody's enemy and as somebody's friend,
so that is not whimsical nature of police.
When a person breaks the laws of nature because of his or her karma,
police may punish, may act as enemy, may beat also.
And police may act in defense also, as friend of some people who are law-abiding citizens.
So this concept is very, very important.
Thus, if we are being put to harassment because of our family members,
which is very natural in Kali Yuga, or because of somebody who is there in our office
or in our school or workplace or in neighborhood, then we should try to tolerate.
Of course, this body is Krishna's property.
The will that we have, the devotee understands it also belongs to Krishna.
So if anybody is unnecessarily causing harm to body and snatching our wealth,
we can take due measures to protect ourselves.
But not developing envy for that person, always having compassion for that person.
So understanding that this person is acting as my enemy simply because of my past karma.
So a person does not develop any hatred even for one's enemy.
Thus it is told in Vedic culture people would follow this.
When you receive an enemy also in your house, the regulation is,
you should receive him in such a friendly manner that he should forget his animosity.
So thus people would be fighting bitterly for each other's life in the battle.
And after sunset, they can visit each other's camp.
They would talk like friends and sometimes play also.
And very nice hospitality would be given.
So Vedic culture is so nice even at the times of war.
A person can be peaceful and he can fight and get relief in the evening.
So Vedic culture wants to maximize the peace in the material world
so that people can without any disturbance always meditate and engage in service of God.
So thus this concept is very important.
Any suffering that I am having is because of my past misdeed.
So somebody chastises me, criticizes me, cheats me, does anything.
So as a matter of duty I should act to protest my interest
but without developing any hatred for the person.
That he is helpless, helplessly acting in lower modes.
But this loss of fame or loss of wealth or any other thing which is happening,
it is only because of my misdeeds.
Rather in Shrimad Bhagavatam it is told
So a person who is not very advanced, sometimes they start blaming God.
And they stop worshipping God.
That I am worshipping you, you don't take care of me, I am going through so many troubles.
But a devotee, when he faces some trouble, even though he is engaged in service of Krishna,
then any trouble is taken as great mercy.
Because advanced devotee means he is having very strong faith in God.
So I am very nicely engaging in service of God.
So whatever God is giving me in my life, that should be for my good.
The example which is given is father may slap a child also sometimes.
But that slapping is out of love.
Because the father is very much caring.
He knows my son will fall from the roof, he is flying kite, unaware that he may fall anytime.
So he will slap him, do not do, do not repeat in future.
Or he may steal money and father knows stealing is very bad.
So out of love such chastisement could be given.
So a son, if he is wise, he realizes that this is for my good.
In a similar fashion, devotee knows I am following all the rules and regulations very nicely.
And after that some distress is coming in my life.
Nothing happens in this world without Krishna's sanction.
So thus he is always satisfied, not disturbed by the disturbance also.
This disturbance also Krishna has sent it to me.
His only prayer is Krishna, please do not let me get so much disturbed
that I may not be able to engage in your service.
So always let me remember you and my seva should not be stopped.
So Krishna please bless me in this way.
Otherwise you send me to heaven, send me to hell.
Whatever punishment is there, do not give me relief.
So a person does not chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra to get any material relief.
He tells Krishna I am suffering, I should suffer much more.
I am worthy of greater punishment.
But by your mercy you have reduced my punishment because I am engaging in your service.
So in this way any difficulty is there, devotee becomes joyful rather than being in a complaining mood.
Oh this purification has come to me.
Krishna has sent this misery in my life so that my heart becomes purified.
I become detached from this temporary place and it is an impetus for my spiritual advancement.
So thus a devotee whenever somebody behaves in not very favourable way, devotee becomes very happy.
This is sanctioned by Krishna.
If any action is sanctioned by Krishna I should be happy because Krishna is my father.
He will not sanction anything if it is not good for me.
So this is the attitude of devotee, complete faithfulness in Krishna, in loss or in gain.
Of course he is not scared also of any material gain.
Material gain is there, he will use in service of Krishna.
Material loss is there, he understands that is for my purification.
So in this way practising non-enviousness is very important.
And then maitra karuna evacha, thus devotee is very friendly because he is non-envious and he is very very compassionate.
So what is the meaning of being compassionate and being friendly?
It means preaching Krishna consciousness.
So this is the only friendly activity that we can do here.
A materialist even though he may try to act in a friendly way, he cannot do but harm other living entities.
Because materialist is contaminated by material energy.
This material energy puts us into illusion that I am this body.
And then so much of trouble starts to preserve this body, protect this body, satisfy this body.
And the living entity does not realize I am this body.
So anybody who has contamination of material energy comes in contact with other people.
They also get infected just like covid patient.
Can you do any kind of help to other living entity?
If he goes to render some help, then that person also will get covid infected.
So that is why they are isolated.
So now in this material world everybody is infected.
So that is why the devotees are being recommended everywhere throughout the Bhagavad Gita.
You please isolate yourself.
This is the element of knowledge.
Do not associate.
So materialist even though he may be having knowledge, he will indulge you more and more in materialistic life.
And thus you will get entangled in this never satisfying repeated process of birth and death.
So devotee is friendly and compassionate.
Friendly means he tries to help other living entities by preaching Krishna Consciousness.
He lives only for the welfare of other living entities.
So in this way, he is friendly because he's always spreading Krishna Consciousness.
Nirmama is the next qualification.
So after being non envious, after being friendly and very, very compassionate.
Devotee understands that I am not the proprietor of anything.
In this world, people want to become bigger and bigger proprietors.
They think this body belongs to me.
These people belong to me.
Why are they not listening to me?
They should listen to me because they belong to me.
And thus everybody is in the false sense of proprietorship.
But a devotee understands, no, that thing belongs to me.
This body I have not designed.
So those people who are connected to this body, they are also not connected to me.
They are connected only to this body.
If I come in different body, then they may not be even able to identify me.
So that is why they don't belong to me.
And all the wealth that I have produced, any position that I have created in society, any property that I have created,
that is because of skills which are inbuilt in this body.
And I have not manufactured this body.
That is why nothing belongs to me.
This body mind is Krishna's arrangement.
God has given.
So everything belongs to God.
So everything should be used in the service of God.
This is the attitude of a wise man.
So that's his nirmama.
Mama means mine.
Nirmama means nothing belongs to me.
It's free from all proprietorship.
So because nothing belongs to me, how can I enjoy it?
Then I become a thief.
If something doesn't belong to me, I enjoy it.
So that is why a devotee wants to use all his resources only in the service of God.
And thus he is free from false ego also.
So the perfection of nirmama is yes, even my body also does not belong to me.
So Bali Maharaj, even though he offered everything to Krishna, Krishna came and cheated Bali Maharaj.
And Bali Maharaj, he offered.
He promised I will offer you three steps of land.
And Vaman Dev, he is Lord Krishna himself.
By extending his two feet, he.
Traversed all the upper limits of the universe and the lower limits.
Also, entire universe got covered by expansion of his two legs.
Now Bali Maharaj became puzzled.
Oh, my God, what is this?
So Vaman Dev becomes angry that you cheated me.
You told me you will promise you had promised you will give me three steps of land.
Where should I put my third step?
So Bali Maharaj was thinking, why am the Lord of the universe?
The small boy having small feet, three steps of land.
Please ask me something big.
He never imagined that this could happen.
So now when there was no place to put the third foot, Bali Maharaj told.
So anyway, you have.
Taken all my property, but there are two things in this world, property and the proprietor.
So property you have taken, but proprietor is bigger than property because proprietor holds the property.
So I, the proprietor, offer myself to you.
Please put your leg on my head.
So you offered his body also.
So then Bali Maharaj's wife came.
She was also very good devotee and she told, please forgive my husband, who is so foolish and is still in the false ego.
He's thinking that he is this body and this body belongs to him.
Thus, he's offering this body to you.
He has still not understood that everything belongs to you.
So thus, Nir Mama, nothing belongs to me means even this body also does not belong to me.
Nothing belongs to me means even this body also does not belong to me.
So I should not use this body for my sense enjoyment.
So many times we ask question that Prabhu, why am I not getting spiritual pleasure?
When will I get spiritual pleasure in life?
Spiritual pleasure we will get only after we follow this Nir Mama.
This body does not belong to me.
How can I enjoy this body for myself?
It is sin. It is not good.
So every activity of the body, every thought of the body should be used only for the service of Krishna.
It is Krishna's property.
How can I enjoy?
If I'm using body for my enjoyment, even for five minutes, then I'm thief for five minutes and a thief cannot be happy.
So thus it is told that what is impediment in spiritual life?
Think as simple as Prajalpa, gossip or some mundane talk.
People take pleasure in talking something.
You know, that is why all newspaper and news and social media people are very eager to know what is happening in the other's life.
So this Prajalpa, simply this worldly talk and gossip, it is the first impediment in spiritual life.
So that is why Nir Mama person understand this mind and body also does not belong to me.
So all the thoughts, all the activity should be used only for the service of Krishna.
Thus he is Nir Ahamkara.
He understands I am not the body also.
So these are the qualifications.
So only when we decide no longer material enjoyment, now I understand everything belongs to Krishna.
So I just want to satisfy Krishna.
Krishna, please save me from any tendency to enjoy materially.
So thus very beautiful prayers are offered in Bhagavatam that Krishna, if at all you wish to fulfill my desire,
then please fulfill this desire of mine that in my heart there will be no material desires.
So just see this is the desire of a devotee that Krishna, you want to fulfill desire,
then please fulfill this desire of mine that in my heart there should be no desires, no material desires of enjoyment.
So when a devotee is firmly, he has decided I don't want to enjoy anymore on material platform something which does not belong to me.
Thus he gets a glimpse of spiritual happiness.
He's equipoise in happiness and distress.
So this point is very, very important. Equipoise in happiness and distress.
So now we are working very, very hard to increase Sukha, increase happiness in our life and to mitigate the distress in our life.
And hard work to increase anything out of proportion.
It means revolting against the arrangement of God.
God has done the arrangement for happiness and distress.
Automatically happiness and distress will come in our life with regulated work.
If anybody is doing hard work, so just like the prisoner is free to move inside the jail, in the jail boundary.
So there he can sometimes play badminton also. He can do some gardening. He can roam here and there. That is OK.
But if he wants to go outside the boundary, he'll be caught. He has to do a lot of hard work.
He has to dig a tunnel or do bribe or climb the fence or do something he will not be allowed to do easily.
So you should understand I'm not allowed to do this.
So that is why only those things a person should try to have, which he can get without extraordinary endeavor, because that is the arrangement of God.
So if anybody is working very hard in life, it means that is envy against God, that God you have done this arrangement.
I will change arrangement. I'm not satisfied by your arrangement.
You made elephants and horses for right. I'll make very nice Harley Davidson Mercedes.
I'm not satisfied with your elephant and horses.
So this means hard work setting up huge industries and thus people become more and more helpless, more and more captured by laws of nature.
So a devotee should learn the art of remaining satisfied in happiness and distress, whatever is coming as per the laws of nature.
So this qualification is very important, as we will see Lord Krishna repeats over and over again throughout Bhagavad Gita.
And among these qualifications, in these shlokas also, Lord Krishna has repeatedly mentioned thrice.
A person should be always equipoised in happiness and distress.
That means submission to Krishna and he understands this happiness and distress.
Although I am experiencing it, it is illusory.
Just like a person sees magic on the stage, girl is getting cut into two parts.
He should not get disturbed because he should know this is only hallucination.
In a similar fashion, I am under hallucination and feeling that, oh, this is pleasant.
This is unpleasant, but this is hallucinatory only because I think I embody I undergo such experiences in life.
So that is why devotee understands it is hallucinatory and it is Krishna's arrangement.
So devotee tolerates happiness and distress.
So this art should be learned how to tolerate happiness and distress, not working very hard to increase happiness and distress.
Thus Bhagavata mentions as soon as a person starts working to increase happiness in his life, his distress immediately begins.
This people do not know.
And Kshami, Kshami means he is very, very forgiving to everybody because we understood that everything which is happening to us, other people, they are simply, if a person becomes angry with the policeman, he should not become.
So policemen has taken any action because of our falsity.
Kshami, he is very, very tolerant. He is forgiving.
He never takes offenses from any wrongdoer in his life.
So anyway, these are very nice qualification.
There is one very nice explanation story in Bhagavatam to explain all these points.
But because we have to go a little fast, so we may not be able to cover.
But please try to write one qualification and try to write every day.
Writing is also very important for spiritual realization.
How I can implement this in my life.
So where in Bhagavatam, in Chaitanya Charita Amrita, I find example of this quality, how I can develop this quality within me.
So all these qualities, how to develop, there is an easy way that also we'll discuss.
It is being explained.
So anyway, today we could not do much.
We could discuss just one shloka of qualities, qualifications.
More we'll discuss in the coming sessions.
