Today we are going to discuss 12th chapter of Bhagavad Gita.
This chapter is very very significant, very important because it directly talks about
the ultimate process.
See Krishna has so far described various processes of devotional service.
In this chapter also we have seen in the concluding verses Krishna mentioned.
So this form yathat tattvam as that is if you want to understand God, God has got unlimited
forms.
With them he showed to Arjuna, he showed universal form, how God has expanded in the form of
the entire universe or so many universes.
He showed the form of time, how past, present, future, all these energies, the time energy,
this element is under control of God, how time destroying everything, that feature was
shown to Arjuna.
Then four-armed Narayan form was shown to Arjuna and then ultimately two-handed form
was displayed.
Then Krishna explained yathat tattvam, this is my as it is form, this is sudur darsham,
this is most difficult to be seen.
Universal form you can see, you are a big tapasvi, big gyanee, if you are little bit
of devotional service but devotion is required to see God.
But if you had a pinch of devotion you can see universal form, virat roop.
But the two-handed form it is inconceivable unless somebody practices ananya bhakti, pure
devotional service.
It is not possible to understand this original form of God.
So Lord Krishna described how bhakti yoga or pure devotional service, unalloyed devotional
service is the only way of understanding and seeing God as it is in his original form.
So this chapter very beautifully, there are so many confusions when we take to spiritual
path and some people as we will be discussing now, they tell God should be worshipped just
like we worship in the temples in the form of deities or worship of formless aspect of
God, sorry, is recommended.
So which of the two processes or any third process we should follow?
There is karma yoga, there is gyan yoga, there is dhyana yoga.
So many stages are there, there is karma sannyas yoga.
So many other processes are there.
So what is important?
What is their relative importance?
So all these things will be beautifully described in this chapter.
So Arjuna begins this chapter by asking this most important question which may haunt many
of the people who have begun their spiritual life.
So let us see what that question is.
So here we are, chapter number 12, devotional service.
Translation, Arjuna inquired, which is considered to be more perfect?
Those who are properly engaged in your devotional service or those who worship the impersonal
Brahm, the unmanifested.
So it is very clear, means always, means engaged, means devotee.
What is the work of devotee, without any deviation, he's engaged in worship.
And there is another category.
So devotee is constantly, 24 hours, he's serving the personal form of God, constant engagement.
Then there is another class, which is beyond the senses and which is again unmanifest.
Different ways of telling the thing which is not perceivable to the senses.
So Arjuna is asking very direct question.
The form of Lord which is unmanifest.
Many people tell that God is just an energy which we cannot see, which is spread everywhere.
Others they are telling no, God is a person.
So some people worship the impersonal aspect and some people worship the personality of
God in his beautiful form, with so many beautiful forms which he has.
Which of the two is perfect?
So we will see what Lord Krishna answers.
So before this, we have to understand what is the actual fact about God, whether God
is having form or God is formless.
So one person who was a little, so many people had assembled in Madras when Prabhupada had
come and Prabhupada was giving, you know, that time Prabhupada was very famous because
he had brought westerners to India.
And first time they were seeing white sannyasis everywhere.
So in this province of Madras, Prabhupada's disciples erected a huge tent and so many
people had come, they had assembled there.
And then after Prabhupada gave a very nice lecture, very straightforward Prabhupada was,
what is this Krishna consciousness movement?
So Prabhupada told, this movement is there to explain people to the foolish people who
do not understand God, who are not able to accept God.
This movement is there to make people understand what is God.
Because unless we understand God, our life is unsuccessful, there is no solution to problems
of life.
And then Prabhupada very beautifully explained.
So after the lecture, one gentleman, he asked Prabhupada very gently.
So some people explain the talk about form, others talk about formless concept of God.
So can you please elaborate on it?
So Prabhupada explained very beautifully that God can be approached in either of the two
God has got three features and analogy is given of that of sun, just like the sun has
got different features.
One is sunlight, another is the sun globe, another is the sun god.
So sun god's body is also made up of fire, although we cannot perceive now on our planet,
but we can understand just like on our planet, the bodies are predominantly made of earth
element.
Similarly, there could be bodies in which fire element is predominant.
We also have fire in the body.
That is how the body has temperature.
And sometimes the fire increases.
Then we tell we have got temperature fever.
So there is fire element.
That is why the heat is maintained in the body.
In some bodies, fire element is increased.
Yogis, they can increase fire element so much that in this way, the yogis leave the body.
The example is that of Dhritarashtra and other instances are there, mother Sati was there.
So many instances are there.
The yogis, they know how to increase fire element so that the fire, which is self-produced
from the body, destroys the body.
And then they leave after destroying this body, merging the elements back to nature.
They travel to their desired planet, their desired body, and they can choose their time
of birth also.
So some people can do that who have got perfect control over this machine.
And we are helpless.
We have to take paracetamol to reduce the temperature or do some other things.
But fire element is present in the body that we all can understand.
That is how we have heat.
So some bodies are there in which fire element is predominant.
And it is mentioned in the Vedas, there are living entities on sun planet.
On that planet, fire element is predominant.
So sun god actually is responsible for all the effulgence that sun globe is producing.
That is under his control.
This is the understanding of the Vedas.
Glowworm we have seen.
It can produce a little bit of light.
Similarly, there is a living entity like sun god who can produce enormous light.
So if somebody is analyzing what is the sun ray, the sun ray is also the same.
That is heat and light.
And what is sun globe, that is also heat and light.
But much more intense.
Intensity is much more of heat and light over there.
But ultimately it is the same thing.
And beyond the sun globe, a person will understand this sun globe is also glowing because of
effulgence coming out of the body of sun god who resides on that planet.
In a similar fashion, it is being explained, Brahmano hi pratishtaham.
Yes, maya tatam idam sarvam jagadavyakta murthina.
So god has got both aspects, personal as well as impersonal.
In impersonal aspect, maya tatam idam sarvam jagadavyakta murthina, he is spread everywhere,
all pervading.
Just like the sunlight is all pervading.
But sun has got a location, it is situated there in the universe.
And sun god also has got a location within that planet.
In a similar fashion, through his energies, god is present everywhere.
Maya tatam idam sarvam, sarvam means everywhere, jagadavyakta murthina, avyakta means unmanifest.
So that energy cannot be seen, just like electric magnetic fields are there.
We cannot see them, but we understand these energies are there.
In a similar fashion, Krishna is present everywhere in the form of his energy.
It is called brahm, sarvam kal vidam brahm.
However, Krishna as a person is present in a particular location.
So realization of this brahm, this energy which is spread everywhere, and we are also
that energy, aham brahmasmi, we are not this body, that is what Krishna has been instructing
Arjuna right from the beginning of Bhagavad Gita, we are not the body, aham brahmasmi,
I am brahm tatva and this consciousness which is present in the body, just like a toy is
animated because of the presence of batteries.
You remove the battery, toy cannot function anymore, it will stop, become still.
In a similar fashion, just like batteries produce animation in the toys, the brahm tatva
produces animation in this body, which is but like a machine.
When the brahm element goes out of body, we call it dead body.
So just like battery, external factor, it animates the toy, similarly in the Vedas that
is being mentioned, and we will see here Lord Krishna describes, he will describe further,
just like one sun illuminates the entire universe.
In a similar fashion, that spirit soul brahm, it illuminates the entire body by consciousness.
So this is the manufacturer of the entire world, God is describing, don't think by
some combination of matter this consciousness arises, no.
So just like the sun produces light, similarly the soul, spirit, that small spark which is
present in the body produces consciousness.
So ultimately it is the same thing, sunlight, sun globe and sun god, their bodies, sun god
and all the denizens of that planet, their bodies are made up of fire and that fire
extends in the form of rays, sun rays.
In a similar fashion, some people try to approach God directly, some people try to approach
through God's energy, in this way they are trying to understand God, first they understand
energy and then they try to understand the source of the energy, but ultimately it is
one and the same thing, just like why one and the same thing?
So some people tell God is just a person, some people tell God is just impersonal, both
are not perfect understandings, God is a person and God is impersonal also, but the impersonal
aspect is dependent upon the person, the personality of God.
Because simply sunlight cannot exist without sun or sun cannot exist without its light.
So sunlight and sun are one unit, in a similar fashion, God and God's energy are one unit.
So that is why it is told in Bhagavatam, Bhagavatam starts after Bhagavad Gita, post graduate
study of spiritual sciences, Shrimad Bhagavatam, Bhagavad Gita is ABCD, primary study.
So in Bhagavatam it is mentioned, vadanti tat tatva vidas tatmam.
So another question was asked to Srila Prabhupada in that assembly.
So is Krishna Consciousness another religion, just like we have Hinduism and Christianity
and like that?
So Prabhupada told Krishna Consciousness is not religion in the usual sense that people
understand religion as it is mentioned in the dictionary, religion is defined in dictionary
as faith.
So faith can change, a person who is Hindu can become Muslim, Muslim can become Christian,
can become Sikh, can become a Buddhist, Buddhist can become Hindu.
So faith changes or they can become atheist.
So this Krishna Consciousness is not a religion, just like the dictionary defines faith.
Faith changes, faith has got no substance like that.
So Krishna Consciousness is a fact.
Krishna tells mama Ivansha jiva loke jiva bhuta sanatanaha, we are part and parcel of
Krishna.
So unless we attach ourselves back in the service of Krishna, there cannot be solution
of the problems of life.
So it is a fact, we can eat so many things.
You can put on your tongue wood or iron, steel, copper, bronze, plastic, chips, xyz.
You can put on your tongue so many things.
But when you put some nice wheat, gulab jamun, oh there is taste, then you feel nice.
So many other substances you put, there won't be taste.
So this is called science, this is not faith.
You put gulab jamun on your tongue, there is generation of pleasure.
This is fact, this is science.
In a similar fashion, Krishna Consciousness, the perfection of religion is also science.
It is not simply faith.
Whether we put faith or we don't put faith, fact remains fact.
So similarly, just like on your tongue, you have to put gulab jamun if you want pleasure.
Similarly, we can become conscious of so many things.
We can think of our property, our nice rank, which we could have got.
We can think of the people we love or the animals we love.
We can think of the fictional characters from Harry Potter.
We can think of celebrity we love.
We can think of so many things.
But unless somebody practices to constantly think of God within his heart,
there is no question of satisfaction in life.
The celebrity whom you are thinking of, they themselves are in depression.
How can we be happy by thinking of them?
So this is called fact.
Just like the finger is part of body, severed finger can never be happy.
Similarly, we, unless we absorb ourselves in thought of God, loving service of God,
there is no question of solving the problems of birth, death,
old age, disease or any happiness in life.
So this is Krishna consciousness. This is fact.
So we need to understand.
Sorry.
So we need to understand what is fact here in this world.
Simply, I have faith in this thing.
You have faith in that.
So this is the talk of less intelligent people.
Intelligent person wants to understand what is fact of life.
So if you analyze the energies like they are analyzing,
oh, this world is not the way we perceive it.
Actually, it is different.
Then they analyze oxygen, selenium and titanium, so many other elements.
And then they further analyze, no, these elements are also not fact.
These elements are also certain combination.
And combination, then they're told of atoms, electron, proton, neutron.
So electron, proton, neutron, when they combine,
then unique configuration is called oxygen.
Unique configuration is called sulfur.
Unique configuration is called sodium.
But ultimately, it is just combination of these particles.
And then they went further.
And now they are telling actually it is energy, string theory, so many things.
They are trying to find out what is truth about this world.
And understanding truth is important because unless you understand
what is truth and follow truth, how you can be happy.
So that truth, Bhagavatam defines, Bhagavatam begins with that.
So like this, if you analyze, no, this is not wood.
This is another substance, carbon.
No, it is not carbon.
It is proton, neutron, electron.
No, not that.
Some energy.
No, not what is that?
Like this, if you keep on analyzing, ultimately, we will reach to energy called Brahm.
And some people who are fortunate, they will understand that it is actually
And then those who are most fortunate, they will understand it is Bhagawan.
So that absolute truth, the ultimate substance from which all categories are emanating,
that is called Brahm by some, Paramatma by others, and Bhagawan by most intelligent people.
But ultimately, substance is one and the same.
Brahm, Paramatma, Bhagawan, they are the same substance.
But these are different features of same absolute truth.
Just like sunlight is another feature of sun only, sunlight cannot be called separate from sun.
In a similar fashion, God is impersonal also, and God is a person also.
They are one unit only.
But the impersonal energy which is spread everywhere, it is coming from personal God.
So there are two parts of existence as it is defined in the Vedas, spiritual world and material world.
In spiritual world, everything is direct manifestation of spiritual energy.
In material world, the energy transforms, the Brahm energy transforms into energy called mahat-tattva.
And then that energy further transforms itself.
Just like from white light, you take out red, blue and green.
And then you combine them to produce so many manifestations.
Ultimately, it is coming from one white light.
In a similar fashion, from that Brahm-tattva, you derive mahat-tattva.
From that mahat-tattva, three modes of nature are created, sattva, rajas, tamas.
Then they combine together to produce so many varieties that we see around us.
Automobiles, human bodies, animal bodies, earth, mud, fire, sky, sound, intelligence.
Everything is transformation of that Brahm-tattva only.
Just like here, you have milk.
Milk is transformed into curds.
Curd is transformed further into butter or buttermilk like that.
The same substance is getting transformed.
The mud is transformed into apple.
Apple gets transformed, we eat into blood.
Then bone marrow, then bones.
Then the body again gets transformed into ash.
And then ash again becomes earth.
Then earth may become something else.
In this way, transformation of energies is going on in the material world.
But spiritual world remains as it is.
So living entities' ultimate objective is to transfer from this ever-changing material world
back to the spiritual atmosphere.
This is the instruction of Bhagavad Gita.
So Arjuna is asking the direct question here.
Some people, they try to approach God through Brahm aspect of God, understanding the energy of God.
They follow that path of Brahm realization.
They are called jnani yogis.
And another category, they directly approach the person from whom energy is coming.
They are called the bhakti yogis.
So which path is superior?
So let us see what Lord Krishna explains.
So very clearly, without any doubt.
So Arjuna was not having doubt, but he was attached to the personal conception of God.
Because when Krishna showed his impersonal form, Arjuna told, please show me your personal original form.
So Arjuna wanted to confirm his position whether I am following the right thing or not.
So Lord Krishna answers very beautifully in this verse.
So Krishna has shown his original form, two-handed form.
And then Krishna tells
In this way, when I am fixed in your heart and you are always engaged in my service, that is the best.
According to me, with great faith, a person who worships God in his original form
that is most perfect.
So how can I engage constantly in worshipping Lord?
How this process is practical?
Should I stand in the temple and keep on showing lamp and incense the entire day?
So that is why it is important to understand these verses with the help of spiritual master.
So Prabhupada is explaining very nicely here.
So this is a practical application of devotional service.
So we feel like talking, then we chant Krishna's name.
When you feel like listening, you hear Krishna's name or the signs of Krishna, the activities of Krishna.
Now you want to eat something, so it does not matter.
Then when you are cooking, don't think I want to eat.
You cook with the intention of pleasing Krishna.
And then after offering it to Krishna, we can eat that.
In this way, you want to clean your house.
Similar activity can be done for cleaning Krishna's place, Krishna's temple.
You want to go out for shopping.
You want to go out and think what can I bring for Krishna?
Oh, I have not purchased dress for Krishna for a long time.
Let me purchase some dress for Krishna.
Oh, Krishna's altar temple looks little less decorative.
Let me purchase these nice festoons or something to make it more attractive.
So in this way, everything, all the activities can be dovetailed for Krishna.
So in this way, it is not impractical, it is very practical.
Just like if there are children in the house, we think about all of them.
So add Krishna as the most important member of the family.
So when the children are going out, they think what can I bring to the parents.
Parents are thinking what we can bring for children.
So we can think what we can bring for Krishna.
In this way, we are always trying to satisfy Krishna.
So this bhakti yoga is very, very practical.
We can just do all the activities, but for the pleasure of Krishna.
And such action is in full samadhi.
So Krishna has given his verdict that this category is the best.
Those who are worshipping the personal form.
Then in verse number 3 and 4, Krishna mentions,
Tu means but, but means contrasting feature is present.
So Krishna has explained here, those who worship
those with great faith who are worshipping the personal form of God
they are of course most perfect, they are best.
But
the same word aksharam, which is not perceivable to senses
anirdeshyam, indefinite, avyaktam, same words, unmanifest
Those who are engaged, but those who fully worship the unmanifested
that which lies beyond the perception of senses, the all-pervading
sarvatragam, sarvatragam means which is all-pervading
Sun is situated in one place, but sunlight is all-pervading, it is everywhere.
Similarly, Krishna's energies are everywhere and achintyam, it is inconceivable.
How this energy is there everywhere?
kutastha machalam dhruvam
Fixed and immovable, the impersonal conception of the absolute truth
by controlling the various senses and being equally disposed to everyone
such persons engaged in the welfare of all at last achieve me.
So Krishna is telling, those who worship personal form
they are the best, but those who worship the form which cannot be
conceived by senses, which is indefinite, which is unmanifest
which is all-pervading, which is inconceivable, which is fixed
so those people who follow this path, they have to control their senses
first of all, very very nicely
and they have to see, all living entities on same platform
they have to be equally disposed, they cannot tell that
they are my father, mother, I will take special care of them
and these people, they are neighbours or they belong to different country
I won't care of them, they won't tell this is dog, this is elephant
they are equally disposed to all the living entities
so Krishna is telling, such persons engaged in welfare of all
at last achieve me and they have to do welfare of all living entities also
so at last such people also achieve Krishna
so Srila Prabhupada explains, in order to perceive the super-soul within the individual soul
one has to seize the sensual activities of seeing, hearing, tasting, working etc
then one comes to understand that supreme soul is present everywhere
so if they have to understand this brahm aspect or super-soul aspect
so God is there, Krishna
Krishna is there, Krishna is there, Krishna is there
so God is there, Krishna
Krishna expands himself in the form of energy which is all-pervading
and in the form of super-soul, that is also all-pervading
within every atom of this universe, Krishna is present as Paramatma
so when a person wants to realise this aspect
either brahm aspect or the super-soul aspect
how Krishna is present as Paramatma
everybody has got Atma
Atma is conscious of that particular body
but Paramatma is conscious of all the bodies
because Paramatma has entered everywhere even in the smallest body of an atom
so if a person wants to understand, practically realise
then one has to seize
one has to seize the sensual activities of seeing, hearing, tasting, working etc
a person cannot see, so this path is very very difficult
a person cannot see, a person cannot hear
that is why one is recommended to go to
as we saw in the 6th chapter of Bhagavad Gita
go to
sattvic place, mountains
you cannot do this practice in group
this ashtanga yoga and other things
so it is very very difficult
first of all you follow brahmacharya
leave your house, family, everybody
cut all the connections, leave all the comforts
give all your wealth in charity
and then go and sit
and gradually you should finish
all the activities of sensation
you should not see anything, eyes should be closed
you should not hear anything, you should not taste anything
eating should be stopped
working should be stopped
motion should be stopped
you should sit at one place only
and the creepers may grow up on your body
insects may crawl upon you
anything can happen
but such a yogi is not supposed to move
then one comes to understand
how supreme soul is present everywhere
so people want to understand
god, understanding god is
so difficult, that is what
krishna is mentioning here
then is it possible that a person
is not eating anything, is not watching anything
is not moving at all
so eating, drinking is
completely stopped
when a yogi is able to do that
after a very very long time
thousands of years, then they can
understand how supreme soul is present everywhere
we want to understand simply by
some arguments
or whatever time we get out of
watching Netflix series
and we debate about god, understanding god
is so easy, no not at all
so why this thing is being explained
because somebody may ask
that krishna, although he has told
in the first verse that those who are
worshipping the personal form, yukta tamah matah
that is the best
but here also krishna has mentioned
they also come to me
those who follow worship the unmanifest form
so what is important
from this verse is to understand that
ultimately approaching personal form
of krishna is must
otherwise there is no perfect realization
that is why krishna has mentioned, even though
these people are controlling their senses, doing
everything, worshipping of yukta
praap nuvanti mam eva, they attain
me ultimately, means their journey is not
stopped unless they attain krishna
they cannot just stop realizing the
light
they also attain me
so attaining krishna is important
so one may ask
if they also attain krishna, other person also
attains krishna, why first process is told
by krishna to be the best
so krishna mentions in the next verse
verse number 5
for those
whose minds are attached to the unmanifested
impersonal
feature of the supreme
advancement is very troublesome
to make progress in that
discipline is always difficult
for those who are embodied
so klesha means
misery, adhik means
more, adhikatara means
very much
klesha adhikatara
tesham, tesha means
for them
for these people who are worshipping
avyaktam pariyupasate
unmanifest form
avyakta asakta chetasaam
asakta means to get attached
avyakta asakta
whose consciousness
is attached to worship this
avyakta form, unmanifest energy
those who want to follow the path
of understanding
this energy of god
chetasaam avyakta hi gathir
dhukham gati means destination
dhukham means misery
so first of all
there is lot of klesha
klesha adhikatara
not little misery
life is full of unlimited miseries
for those who follow this path
and the destination is also full
of misery it is told
for those who are embodied
means conditioned by the body
soul is not liberated for them
so this process is very very difficult
to be followed
so shilaprabhupada explains
the group of transcendent lists
who follow the path of inconceivable
unmanifested impersonal feature of the supreme
lord are called jnani yogis
jnani yogis
they just understand energy
I am not the body, I am energy
and they tell this energy only is god
so that is why they tell I am god, you are god
because they don't have any concept of person
so that is why they tell I am god, you are god
everyone is god, we are in different external packages
so such people are called jnani yogis
and persons who are in full krishna consciousness
engaged in devotional service to the lord
are called bhakti yogis
now here the difference between jnani yoga
and bhakti yoga is definitely
expressed
the process of jnani yoga although
ultimately bringing one to the same
goal is very troublesome
whereas the path of bhakti yoga
the process of being in direct service
to the supreme personality of godhead
is easier
and is natural for the
embodied soul
so why krishna is giving preference to
bhakti yoga because it is very
natural this process to be followed
and it is very very easy to perform
which person can do
especially in this age in kali yoga it is not
possible, the other path could have
been taken by some those who want to take
but still in previous other ages
when senses mind were controlled
you can stop your
eating, sleeping, working
watching, hearing, now we cannot
do that we will die immediately
what to speak of dying, first of all leaving
family itself is so tough, people are so
attached to sense enjoyment, what to
speak of leaving family, people cannot leave
their smartphones, so thus
it is not possible to follow this process
in this age and even though when
it was possible also krishna
is telling bhakti yoga is best
and jnana yoga this path
is very very troublesome
so here
you please read the purport
we do not have much time so i will explain just the
bullet points
so there is one thing that
a person who is following the path
of impersonal realization that path
is difficult as it is mentioned here
but there is a risk
also involved that a person may not
reach the ultimate end
of personality of godhead
this explanation is given
in srimad bhagavatam so it is
being explained there
so some people
who are surrendered to god
it is being explained there
some people who do not surrender
to god
so those people who do not
take shelter of god what do they do
means to
climb up
means by great struggle and trouble
so this process is very
troublesome you have to stop all the senses
devotee can very nicely
continue his eating but he
eats for krishna krishna prasadam
devotee can continue sleeping
he sleeps
in dissatisfaction
that why i cannot serve
krishna just like the child
child is playing very nicely
and
child gets tired or
child is watching very nice
something on the television
so he does not want to sleep
so but sleep is a burden
he cannot enjoy
in a similar fashion devotional service
is so full of pleasure but devotee
feel disgusted why do i have to sleep
why this fatigue stops my service to
krishna so with this
mood the devotee takes rest
so that body gets rejuvenated again
for serving krishna the next day
so the sleeping can be engaged
in service of krishna eating can be engaged
in service of krishna
talking need not be stopped he can talk
about krishna hearing need not be stopped
he can hear songs about krishna the name of
krishna so thus it is easy to follow
in this process you have to stop all the
sensual activities and then even
if you follow
you can attain parampada
the top most position spiritual platform
you can understand perfectly i am
not the body you can understand the whole world
this is illusion having different external
dresses but everyone is ultimately
soul and within soul along with the soul
there is super soul
but even though
a person is having such realization
those who have not taken shelter
of the lotus feet of krishna
patanti means fall down
this is told in bhagavatam
the crux of all the vedas
so what is the crux
the crux is a person should take shelter
of krishna otherwise with great
trouble you have come to this realization
that you are not body
and you are surpassed
the death also still
you will fall down again to these material
bodies
patanti adha
because the nature of soul is to remain
in activity
so they can again if they don't have knowledge
of spiritual activities they can again
engage in material activities
so thus a person
may not realize there is a chance
even though you may take a very long
time krishna tells
bahunam janmanam ante gyanavan gyanee
who has attained knowledge
bahunam janmanam ante
after many many births
they understand me vasudevam sarvam iti
that it is krishna only you spread
everywhere in the form of energy
samahatma sudurlabha such a person
is very rare after many many
births a gyanee is able to understand
krishna so many times they are not
able to reach that understanding of vasudev
so thus there is risk
of not realizing the absolute truth also
so first of all there is troublesome
it is very very troublesome
and then even if you follow this path
you may not attain some people do attain
just like matrimony is there
who became great devotee his teachings
are there in bhagavatam similarly
shukadeva goswami he was a liberated
soul he was
brahma gyanee before he took birth
similarly four kumaras
so they were all impersonalists bilmangal
thakur they were all impersonalists
who became devotees later
so it is being
explained further by the grace of some
devotee such a transcendentalist
highly learned in the process of gyan yoga
may come to the point of bhakti yoga
or devotional service so such an impersonalist
after many births if he meets a person
who has knowledge of personal form of
god in their association
these people also can come to
this perfect understanding
but then there is another trouble
at that time
long practice in impersonalism
also becomes a source of trouble
because he cannot
give up the idea
so person has
been meditating upon this idea
for a very long time
that god is not having form
god is impersonal and like that
so it is very difficult for such people
to remove all these concepts
impersonal concepts
so he cannot give up the idea
so like this various troubles are there
so I personally was following
this process of gyan yoga
before I came to krishna consciousness
so it was very difficult for me
to take out those concepts from the mind
and I was thinking that prabhupada
is twisting the meanings
he is taking out another meaning from these verses
then by prabhupada's mercy
mercy of other devotees
I was able to realize it is not the twisted meaning
it is the real actual explanation
because prabhupada knows
the entire knowledge of bhagavad gita
very beautifully he has given the right understanding
so it was very difficult to remove
those concepts whenever I would read bhagavad gita
I would understand
the impersonal meaning from every verse of bhagavad gita
so it is very very dangerous
you may not attain that so many troubles are there
and at the end
you cannot give up the idea
because for long you have practiced
so thus this process of
centering attraction on the unmanifested
inconceivable
which is beyond the approach of senses
should never be encouraged at any time
specially in this age of kalyuga
so here in the
concluding verses
lord krishna
I mean concluding verses of today
lord krishna again mentions
the contrast
so the word is used here
so krishna has explained the position
that it is
there is
there is
in this process of worshipping
impersonal aspect of god
but krishna is mentioning
what krishna is mentioning here why he has spoken
but
for one who worships me giving up all his
activities unto me
and being devoted to me without deviation
engaged in devotional service
and always meditating upon me
who has fixed his mind upon me
oh son of pritha
for him
I am the swift deliverer from the ocean
of birth and death
so here it is
being explained
one who worships me
giving up all his activities unto me
this is called actual sannyas
imperfect sannyas
is stopping all the activities just like
jnana yogis and ashtanga yogis may follow
but yukta vairagya is
nirbande krishna sambande
that is what krishna is mentioning here
ye tu sarvani karmani mai sannyasya
he gives up all
activities unto krishna
means he does activities only for the
satisfaction of krishna
and being
devoted to me without any deviation
ananyena
anyena means any other alternative
ananyena means no alternative
without deviation
yogena is fixed in the process of bhakti yoga
mam dhyayanta upasate
in this way he is
meditating upon the form of lord
and he is doing all activities just for
the pleasure of krishna
you can be king, you rule so that people can
become devotees of krishna
you are parent, you produce children
so that they can become devotees of krishna
so in this
fashion all the activities
are being done only for the pleasure
of krishna that is called
mai sannyasya matpara
then what happens to them
tesham aham samuddharta
in this way when the mind is fixed
and the activities are also fixed upon
personal form of krishna
then for them it is very very easy
why it is easy krishna tells that is why krishna
has used the word here but
those who worship me in my personal form
their mind fixed on me, activities
dedicated to me
tesham aham samuddharta mrtiv sansara sagara
the purpose of both devotees
is same to transcend this
stop this process of repeated birth
disease and old age it can be
stored by the science, spiritual science
people do not know all the diseases
death can be solved
mrtiv sansara sagara
crossing the mrtiv sansara sagara
is the
objective but this objective
is attained simply
by my help krishna is telling
aham samuddharta i take
him out
and when do i take him out
after many many births, no very soon
na chirath, chirath means long time
na chirath means very soon
mai aveshita chetasam
but chetasam
those whose minds are mai aveshita
fixed unto me
so this is called krishna consciousness
so those whose minds are fixed upon krishna
those who do all activities
simply for the satisfaction of krishna
there is a stark contrast between
such bhakti yogi and
jnana yogi whose life is full of trouble
troubles and end is also troublesome
to remove those concepts
and there is a risk he may never attain
the ultimate understanding of
taking shelter of the personality
of god however a devotee
krishna mentions but
for a devotee tesham aham samuddharta
so i am the
swift deliverer so it is
very easy if you are
there in the ocean by your endeavor
you cross the ocean or somebody
air lifts you that is the difference
between jnana yoga and bhakti yoga
so however best a person
swimmer he can be
it is impossible
to cross the ocean simply by swimming
capacity but if somebody
is air lifted then they can be saved
so thus this process is recommended
so just chapter number 12
verse number 1 to 7
you show to anybody
and nobody can counteract you they can
tell follow jnana yoga process this
process is best so but
unfortunately this knowledge of god
personality this personal process
bhakti yoga is very very confidential
so it is not
easily revealed to people
that is why most of the people are
away from this
very clear understanding which krishna has mentioned
in bhagavad gita however we are
fortunate we have got the right knowledge
of bhagavad gita so please explain
to anybody this bhakti yoga
process the top most directly it has
been mentioned from verse number 1 to 7
in chapter number 12
so with this we will finish today's
discussion and now
we will practice this bhakti yoga
how this can be practiced
it is very simple the process
for this age kali yoga is yes all
the senses all the capacity whatever we have
should be engaged in service of krishna
but it begins with jiva
with jiva tongue so tongue
can vibrate we have to use our tongue to
vibrate krishna's name
so very simple meditation we have to do
krishna and
now we understood everything is krishna
only whether it is
taste whether it is form whether it is
heat or light everything is
nothing but krishna krishna and
his energies
and this sound what we are producing
it is personally krishna
so we are directly in contact with
god who has come in the form of
sound incarnation so with great
respect we should chant and
we should hear each and every word nicely
this is the top most meditation
recommended in bhagavad gita
