Advestasarvabhutana maitra karuna evacha
First of all, the living entity who wishes to enter into the deep mystery of God realization.
So Shrimad Bhagavatam explains.
The most wise living entity in this universe is Lord Brahma.
And what is the lifespan of Lord Brahma as compared to ours?
We live maximum of 100 years.
That is also very very rare seeing today's situation.
So we live for 100 years of this earthly planet.
And one day of Lord Brahma is equal to 44 lakh years of earthly planet.
So we can just imagine.
44 lakh years of one of our earth planet is one day of Brahma which is called Kalpa.
And Brahma lives such 100 years.
It means Brahma's age is around 330 trillion years.
So Shrimad Bhagavatam further explains.
This difference of lifespan in the same proportion we can compare
Brahma's intelligence to intelligence of earthly living entities.
So Brahma is trillions of times wiser, more intelligent than all of us the living entities on this planet.
So you can just imagine our brain is so wonderful.
And if somebody's brain is trillions of times wonderful,
then what extraordinary intelligence that person is possessing.
And obviously it is required.
That is how Brahma knows how to create the entire universe.
So many laws, so many complexities, laws of karma defining the future, writing the destiny.
How Brahma creates our destiny?
If we have hurt, punched in the stomach of somebody, we'll develop stomach pain in the next life.
This is the law of nature.
You disrespect somebody, you will get disrespect.
You donate your money to somebody, money has to come back to you in the next life.
How this arrangement is made?
This is the intelligence of Lord Brahma.
Trillions of times more intelligent than us.
And that Lord Brahma also, he got completely confused in understanding Lord Krishna.
And he mistook Lord Krishna as an ordinary boy.
And later he realized his offense and thus he offered the wonderful prayers.
If you want to understand Krishna using your intelligence, please give up this attempt.
I could not understand Lord Brahma, who is trillions of times more wiser than all of you.
I could not understand.
Udapasya means give up.
Namantayeva, become very very humble.
Understand you are not even an ant in the universal scale.
So using your intelligence, you can never understand God.
Never. It is not possible to understand anything about God.
It is not possible even to understand about ourselves that we are spirit souls different from the body.
What to speak of the infinite spirit?
So thus it is not possible at all to understand God simply on the dint of our intelligence.
So Lord Brahma recommends,
Gnane prayasam udapasya namantayeva.
Become humble, offer your respects.
Jeevanti sanmukharitam bhavadiyavartam.
So live your life as per the directions of pure devotees.
Thane sthitva ashrutigatam hi punsam.
Tanu van mano bhir namantayeva.
So one has to completely surrender to Krishna.
Tanu van mano bhir.
Tanu means body, vaak means speech and mana means mind.
So with mind, body and words, namantayeva person has to completely surrender himself to Krishna.
So such a person who has completely surrendered himself to Krishna,
surrendered how? Not just body.
Surrender with words and surrender with mind also.
In this way when a person has completely surrendered himself to Krishna,
and after surrender also something has to be done.
So surrendering is the beginning.
My mind, I don't allow anything to think other than interest of Krishna.
My body does not act in any way other than interest of Krishna.
My words are always for glorifying Krishna.
And then sthane sthitva, then wherever you are,
if you are in such a way, in such a consciousness of complete surrenderence,
then wherever you are situated, it does not matter.
Whatever job you are doing, it does not matter.
But this surrenderence is important.
Without this, spiritual life does not begin.
And after surrendering in this wonderful consciousness,
a person should simply keep on hearing the nectarian messages of Lord Krishna.
And in this way a person can develop all these wonderful qualities.
So Krishna is supreme, pure, only when a person attains complete freedom from
rajaguna, tamoguna, modes of passion and ignorance, lust and greed,
a person can come to platform of understanding God.
And eventually if he is able to continue on that platform,
after leaving the body, he goes on to live with Krishna
in his original spiritual existence.
So thus, not by any other activity, but simply by this hearing process
and in complete surrenderence, engaging oneself in the service of Krishna,
a person develops all such qualities.
However, development of such qualities is required.
If such qualities are not developing within us,
then we should improve our hearing process.
There are nine processes of devotional service.
Those of you who are regular, you must be knowing.
And all these are bona fide ways of perfection in Krishna consciousness.
But all the other processes, eight processes, will not be fruitful if hearing is not perfect.
So that is why some devotees tell that.
And we see that they are doing very nice.
They are engaged in seva very nicely.
And they are offering money also, whatever they are earning.
Some devotees are so nice that they offer much more than what they earn also.
They may donate, we spend using credit cards, they donate using credit cards.
Or they work overtime. Okay, Prabhu, it does not matter.
I want to do seva, I learn later.
So, so nice. But what is missing?
Namanta eva.
First of all, surrenderence is not there.
Seva is happening, but without surrender, then we have to wait.
We keep on doing seva, we will surrender.
And then we keep on hearing.
Some devotees are not able to hear.
They are doing other things very nicely.
But not able to hear means reading or hearing.
It is the same thing.
In Vedic time, there is no need of reading.
Thus, you will not find much the word reading.
But still it is mentioned.
Even for the Dhyani yogi Swadhyaya is very, very important, Kapil Muni explains.
And many other places it is there.
But hearing is given more stress because this was a prime means.
There was no need to read, have books.
Simply they would hear, they were so sharp.
They were shruti dharas, would be able to keep it in the mind for the rest of their life.
And would understand also immediately on hearing.
So Das, whenever we come across the word hearing, it means hearing and reading both.
So if you are not able to take proper quality time for reading the books or hearing the books,
then we may be doing very nice deity worship.
We may be having deities in our house.
We will be offering all the items to them.
But if you are not reading nicely, if you are not hearing nicely,
either chanting of the holy names or the messages of Krishna,
hearing should be done of both.
Offenseless hearing of the holy name as well as Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavatam, the Vedic literatures.
So on the basis of such hearing, it is mentioned in Bhagavatam,
devotee is able to perceive the presence of Krishna in the temple.
Otherwise we would go to temple and we must be seeing some dolls as Prabhupada mentions.
What are these dolls standing here, a person may wonder.
Materialist does not appreciate that this is Supreme Personality Himself standing
or somebody may think a statue, stone like that.
So in order to perceive the presence of God in temple, again hearing is very important.
Prabhupada tells if you don't hear, then archa-vigraha will become galagraha.
You will think, oh, this is not archa-vigraha.
This is not worshipable deity incarnation of Krishna.
This is galagraha. This is noose in my neck.
This is burden my Guru has given me.
So let me employ some pujari to take care or we will become neglectful
because we will not be able to perceive.
So in order to perceive the presence of Krishna in all the aspects of devotional service,
person should hear very, very nicely.
That is why we request everybody to hear Srila Prabhupada every day,
as much as possible throughout the day.
You are engaged in some other activity and so many activities we do in a day
in which parallel hearing is also possible.
So as much as possible, just like the smokers,
after working every for say one hour or even 30 minutes,
they go out and smoke and then they continue their work.
So similarly, we should develop this hearing habit.
And all the devotees here, they practice.
As soon as devotees get up, some devotees are taking bath.
Prabhupada lecture is going on.
They are washing their clothes.
Prabhupada lecture is going on.
They are coming out.
They are wearing the dress, getting ready for aarti.
Prabhupada lecture is going on.
Honoring prasadam, Prabhupada lecture is going on.
Or doing cleaning or anything, Prabhupada lecture is going on.
So traveling, lecture is there.
So as much as possible throughout the day, we should maximize our hearing.
More so in Kali Yuga.
This is the only process.
And otherwise also, unless hearing is perfect,
other processes will not be effective.
So hearing we should not take lightly, offenseless hearing,
with great respect, trying to hear the holy name very nicely
and the messages of Lord Krishna.
And when we hear nicely, again the effect should happen.
If a person hears nicely, then automatically these qualities will develop.
It is not that we have to endeavor.
Now one person, even first loka was so heavy.
A dvesta person has to be non-envious even from the enemies.
Somebody is coming to kill you.
You should not develop any kind of ill feeling towards your killer also.
And how is it possible?
Because a person understands it is because of my karma
that somebody is causing any kind of harm to me
or criticizing me, saying ill words.
So in this way, a devotee does not hate the instrument of actions.
And he is not just non-envious, non-different.
He is very friendly.
Trying to friend means a friend in need is a friend indeed.
When the friend is in need, we go and help.
So everybody is in need.
People are dying.
Suppose somebody is dying in front of us
and we know the medicine.
Shall we not be very eager to give that medicine to others?
And we have the medicine.
Simply by giving this harinam, the message of Bhagavad Gita,
people can stop their death.
People can solve all the stress and anxieties.
Even in this life, they can become permanently happy and peaceful.
So we have got the medicines.
So we should be very, very eager to eat the medicine
and to give the medicines to others also.
And nirmama, we understood, he understands I am not the body.
So I cannot enjoy the body.
I am not the mind.
So mind and body should be used for Krishna's enjoyment.
And he is out of false ego because he understands
I am not the body and mind.
And thus he is able to always maintain himself equipoised,
whether it is sukha or dukkha.
And he is thus very, very forgiving
because he understands everybody is helplessly acting as per the modes of nature.
I am receiving simply the return of my karma, my past activities.
So he is very forgiving.
There is no grudge in the heart.
This person did like that to me.
This person did not or does not behave nicely with me.
There is no grudge in the heart of everyone.
So devotee is always very, very peaceful and happy.
Especially for following Krishna consciousness, mind should be very, very peaceful.
So devotee is always very forgiving.
And then, if our hearing is perfect,
devotional service is perfect,
all the other symptoms should also develop.
And what are the other symptoms we should expect
after if we are proper in our execution of hearing and devotional service?
Santushta means satisfied.
The devotee should be satisfied.
Yes, Prabhu, I am very much satisfied.
When I go out and eat nicely in restaurant on weekends, I become satisfied.
When I watch my favourite Netflix series, I am satisfied.
No, Santushta, satatam, devotee should always be satisfied.
Not for few moments.
That is the happiness of rajaguna.
Material enjoyment satisfies you immediately.
And then there is so much of misery.
So we were speaking to one of the people we had hired for cooking.
So he is also a good devotee,
but somehow he could not follow full time.
And thus he takes some remuneration and he helps in various ways.
So I was asking, so how is life?
Where do you want to go after this life?
You want to go to Vaikuntha or Goloka Vrindavan?
So he smiled, started laughing.
Prabhuji, we are not so fortunate.
We were very small and parents, they got us married at very early age.
We were not having discrimination also.
Now I am working so hard, I cannot spend any money on myself.
Now recently I started spending money because I have got diabetes.
So now what enjoyment I can have of my money is my medicines only.
Otherwise everything is going for the welfare of the family.
And the family is also never satisfied.
Prabhu, we are stuck.
So initially, yes, it appears very very pleasant, all the material enjoyment.
So any step taken for material enjoyment is source of complete misery.
Immediately there would be pleasure.
But long term there is only misery.
So we are not telling that any kind of activity will lead to misery.
But any kind of activity for sense enjoyment, any kind of endeavor for Krishna's pleasure,
it gives satisfaction to the heart.
So that is why very important word used here is Satatam.
Devotee should be satisfied always, in every circumstances.
And yogi, one should be yogi.
It is one very important qualification.
So a person who wishes to qualify himself to go back to Godhead should remain satisfied always.
In every situation.
And he should be a yogi.
And this word also Krishna uses many times.
Yatatma means endeavoring.
Dhridha means with great determination and wow.
So Prabhupada explains, spiritual life has to be followed in a military discipline.
Although such things may make it little difficult, but nevertheless it has to be followed in that manner.
In Kali Yuga, it is very very simple.
Simple rules and regulations we have to follow.
Otherwise it was so difficult.
Even process of bhakti yoga being the simplest and sublime was also difficult.
Like Dhruv Maharaj, small boy, five year old, Krishna did not show any mercy.
Krishna was always merciful to give instructions, but this was expected.
Even five year old boy had to stop breathing also.
He left eating and drinking months ago.
Six months he did tapasya.
So eventually he gave up eating.
He was eating dry grass and leaves.
Then he was drinking water every seven days or ten days.
Then he was breathing every ten or twelve days.
And then eventually stopped breathing also.
Can we do that without breath for a long time?
So it is impossible.
We will die.
Our bodies cannot sustain.
Valmiki also, bhakti yoga, chanting the names of Ram.
But he had to chant for 60,000 years.
So even bhakti yoga had a lot of austerity.
And this bhakti yoga is the easiest.
What to speak of those who take austerities?
That is why Krishna tells.
Valmiki had to meditate for 60,000 years.
And a person is not bhakti yogi.
He has to take many many lifetimes of austerity.
So understanding God is extremely difficult job.
Thousands of years of tapasya in one life.
And many such lives a person has to spend.
10,000 years of tapasya Krishna's parents did.
To have him as their child.
But now in this age, Kali Yuga.
Not 10,000 years.
Few years a person can get the same result.
So that is why the age of Kali Yuga is worshipable.
By those people who are in the same age.
But now in this age, Kali Yuga.
Not 10,000 years.
Few years a person can get the same result.
So that is why the age of Kali Yuga is worshipable.
By those people who are in knowledge.
General people criticize Kali Yuga.
It is full of faults.
But those who are in knowledge.
They worship this age.
So just imagine thousands of years of austerity.
In bhakti yoga person has to take.
So Kali Yuga it is so simple.
You get up in the morning.
Take cool water bath.
And follow four regulative principles.
Just honor Krishna prasadam.
Don't eat outside.
And sing and dance everyday in front of Krishna.
Eat nice tasty dishes.
And hear such wonderful philosophy.
But mind will, we are unfortunate.
Association is so bad.
We are not able to remain fixed in our understanding also.
So just like so many people they attend our workshops.
And 3000 people registered.
1000 turned up.
Recent workshop.
Out of 1000, hardly I think 40-50 would be continuing.
Or even less than that.
And how many of them will continue further.
That is even less.
How many will become advanced devotees.
Because this determination is very much
missing in Kali Yuga.
Everybody likes it. But determination is not there.
Very sincere devotees.
They would chant 16 rounds 4 days in a week.
Or 3 weeks in a month.
And then they will miss.
So they will get up in the morning.
Again they will start sleeping.
So it is difficult to remain.
But that is very important.
Person should be very much
fixed up in the vows.
It is mentioned you can decide your vows
as per yourself.
Yourself means not whimsically.
Same rules and regulations we have to follow.
What are mentioned in this age.
But as per your capacity.
It is mentioned we should
chant Hare Krishna mantra.
How many times you can do. You cannot chant 16 times minimum.
Then you fix as per your level.
But don't fail in that.
So other rules and regulations are there.
You pick up. Okay I can follow only up to this level.
But do not reduce that.
Raghupa told you have no time for chanting.
But you are eating nicely and sleeping nicely.
Then that is cheating.
If one day we do not eat, we will not die.
If one day we don't sleep, we will not die.
But if you miss chanting, definitely we will die.
So to attain platform of immortality,
we have to follow this with great adherence.
So spiritual advancement
depends upon this.
Not whimsically doing very much
devotional service one day.
Not doing at all another day.
But fixing up and following consistently.
This great determination is required.
So always remaining satisfied
being a yogi.
Endeavoring with great determination.
Mind and intelligence
should be offered to Krishna.
So Krishna mentioned this just couple of
verses ago. Again Krishna is
repeating. So some qualifications
you will find they are being repeated here.
So Srila Prabhupada explains
repetition is not because
the speakers do not know, Krishna
may not know that I have spoken
previously. But because
it is Krishna is stressing
on this point, these qualifications you
must acquire. This is very very important.
So mayi arpit mano buddhir
it is very much important,
very much required. Because all
our actions depends upon the state of mind.
So if our mind is fixed in Krishna
then all the activities will be dedicated to Krishna
automatically. So somehow
or the other
That is why this varnashama system
is designed so nicely. Especially
the process of bhakti yoga. That
a person can always think of Krishna in
all the activities of
ahar or nidra
or even maithun
or any other activity.
Any kind of enjoyment a person wants
Krishna was always brought into picture.
So always the mind should be fixed in Krishna
and intelligence also should be thinking of
interest of Krishna. Mayi arpit mano buddhir
Yo mad bhaktah same priya ha
So this line also you will find
is being repeated now throughout this
chapter, 12th chapter.
Yo mad bhaktah same priya, bhaktiman me priyo na raha
So Arjuna asks this question
Bhakta devotees priya to you or gyaani
to you, who worships your
unmanifest form.
So Krishna in order to
assert the point, nobody
but a bhaktah is dear to me.
So that is why Krishna is telling bhaktah
same priya, only bhaktah is dear to me.
Such a bhaktah is dear to me. Such a devotee is dear
to me. So there is no doubt only
a devotee is dear to Krishna and he can understand
all the
perfection of spiritual life.
It is off?
Okay.
Our clubhouse got muted somehow. I do not
know. It is not mute.
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna.
I am speaking but I think the voice
is not going.
I will join again.
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna,
Hare. Yeah.
I think it gets muted
often. Anyway.
Mai arpit mano buddhir yo mad bhaktah
same priya
So such a devotee is very dear to Krishna.
So any person who reads Bhagavad Gita
will spontaneously come to this conclusion.
Krishna is telling only a devotee is dear to me.
And then such devotee
develops other such qualities,
qualifications also.
Now this is very very important
verse. People want to understand
relationship management. The relationships
are very very bad.
And people are
very much frustrated how to manage.
So this is
the key verse for
managing all the relationships.
Chapter number 12, verse
number 15.
What is the qualification of a devotee?
So first qualification is
nobody
he for whom
no one is put into difficulty
and
who is not disturbed by anxiety
who is steady
in happiness and distress is very
dear to me. So first of all
the devotee's actions
are so performed that nobody
is put into anxiety because of actions of
a devotee. So when Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu was instructing Sanatana Goswami
the founders of the current
Vrindavan that we see. So he
gave this very important instruction.
Vaishnava's behavior is such
that no living entity
not just human beings.
We talk of humanity but humanity is not
perfect platform of compassion
because people who call themselves
great humanists
they kill animals. So animals
is also a living entity just in a different
dress. So no living entity
should be brought into anxiety
or distress.
First of all
so this is very important whenever we are acting
we should try to act in such a controlled manner
that is why it is told in the
Veda.
We don't compromise.
And whatever is there in our heart it comes out
so Vedas still do not do like that.
So speak the truth
but in a way that is palatable
to others. Only exception
is when Guru is preaching to his disciple
because the disciple is completely surrendered
so he need not bother about
this thing although the truth
could be very unpalatable and harsh
but to help the disciple
a bitter medicine also needs to be administered.
So if anybody surrendered
he or she is willing to get knowledge
then spiritual master without
any compromise he preaches the truth.
But otherwise this etiquette has to be followed.
This is one of the austerities
austerity has to be done on various levels.
We will see all such wonderful knowledge in the coming chapters.
So austerity of speech, austerity
of mind, austerity of body.
Three different kinds of austerity or tapasya
is there. Human life is meant simply
for austerity.
Taking in bits and pieces
more and more discomforts in our life.
We should practice independence.
If you increase so called comforts in the life
you become more and more dependent.
So austerity of speech
it is mentioned in Bhagavad Gita
nobody should become agitated by what you are speaking.
So devotees very careful
by devotees words
or by devotees actions
nobody becomes agitated.
And some people are anyway
naturally agitated.
Demonia class as soon as they hear Krishna's name
so then nothing can be done.
But devotee is not the reason for anybody's agitation.
So this is very important.
So all of us when we are acting
inside the house, outside the house,
anywhere we should be careful
we don't become the cause of anxiety for others.
So one question
which is naturally asked is
when we discuss this quality
Okay, Prabhu, I may not agitate others
but others will take advantage
and they will start bullying over us
and they will ride over us
and they will ride over us
and make our life miserable.
So nobody can make our life miserable
if we are properly situated
in Krishna Consciousness.
Lokan means
other people also cannot agitate
a devotee. This is the qualification.
Devotee does not agitate others
and devotee is not agitated
by others.
And so many examples we see in the history
all the great saints
they were put into so much harassment
by the public, by the society
nobody appreciates the activities of
devotee. Nobody is able
to understand but only another devotee
will understand. Otherwise
a devotee is treated as
irresponsible person
or devotee is treated as an escapist
or devotee is treated as very
proud person by other
he thinks they don't follow any other process
and they are too proud of their philosophy
so either devotee is considered
a proud person or he does not talk to us
he remains aloof or they make
a fine devotee, irresponsible
person, parasite in the society
simply for their enjoyment
they are enjoying the donations of
society and not contributing anything
or they may accuse
Prabhupada as he told.
There were many cases on the movement
especially in America of brainwashing
and there was a person
who established the start-up in the west
and what was this
business about? It was about deprogramming
he read all the books of Prabhupada very nicely
his name was Ted Patrick
you can find YouTube interview also
so this person had
established the deprogramming company
and the parents of devotees would be
their clients and he would
take money from them and try to deprogram
he thought that these people they have been
programmed to think in such a way
because when we become devotee a life takes
a U-turn our perception actions become totally
different. So then
he read and his team
all the books of Prabhupada very nicely
and they would write books how to counter all these
arguments. They would kidnap the devotees
and they would try to brainwash again them
but they were hardly successful. Some very new
devotees they were able to change but
mostly they could not. So Krishna
consciousness is very very deep
and some of the devotees were kidnapped by
their parents that our son has
gone mad and they were giving them drugs
that somebody has brainwashed and
this thing and they administered drugs for
many many months but when the devotee
became conscious again
they could not stop. Again they
came back to Krishna. So this Krishna consciousness
is not any superficial
imposition on the soul. Unless we
become disobedient to devotees we
become offensive to devotees Vaishnavas
Vaishnavapara then complete
bewilderment is there. Otherwise
anybody who has sincerely chanted the name
of Krishna even once such a person
does not go away.
Sometime he may get deviated but he comes
back.
So
so although
nobody understands a devotee
everybody saw this very nice
by Shri Madhavendra Puri
that how
nobody can appreciate a devotee
is appreciating a devotee but devotee
does not budge an inch
from his constant meditation upon the
lotus feet of Krishna.
So all such devotees
they had to undergo. Prahlad Maharaj
underwent so much of trouble. Jesus Christ
underwent so much of trouble.
Haridas Thakur underwent so much of trouble.
Shila Prabhupada underwent so much of trouble.
Meera Bai underwent so much of trouble.
And
so many such cases are there
but they were completely undisturbed
by all these things.
So as I had explained before also
I will explain again this is very
important instance. So if
we hear these things repeatedly it gets embedded
deep in our heart.
So one couple were there
and
sannyas is very bona fide way
surrendering yourself completely
into Krishna and apparently
the world may perceive that you have given up your
responsibilities but actually
it is for a higher cause just like nobody
accuses a soldier who
may leave all
the responsibilities and fight for country
sacrifices life. Similarly
devotees responsibilities much higher
is stopping the death of all the living entities.
So it's very bona fide way
but somehow
some devotees specially in the
west who were very new they were
taking sannyas as an excuse to
come out of the complications
of a household life. So if a
person is not very very strict in following
rules and regulations of household life
household life is usually very
very troublesome and there is
unlimited anxiety piercing thorns
are felt entire life.
Unless devotee is very advanced
so one devotee writes prabhupada
so I think my wife is an
impediment in my spiritual life so I am
planning to take sannyas.
So then prabhupada explained
very nicely that
without consultation
or pre consideration
you entered into grhasta ashram
whimsically and now whimsically
you want to come out of it.
So it is because of ignorance prabhupada
explained. We think that
something is impediment in my
krishna consciousness.
When we are in trouble now this is very important
statement which prabhupada explained
when we are in anxiety we are in trouble
and
the people
who are surrounding us or the
place of our living or the systems
in which we are placed into misery we think that
system or those people
or that place is responsible
for our suffering.
They lack krishna consciousness so I am
suffering so just like we meet
some people so they tell
prabhu please explain my husband also
he does not understand and he speaks
all this thing and disturbs me
or some other person will tell like that husband
will tell wife does not listen or
parents children disturb us children will
tell father mother are disturbing me
but they don't understand
prabhupada explained
we think we are suffering
because of lack of other persons krishna consciousness
however we have to understand
if there is any disturbance in my
life it is not due to lack of other persons
krishna consciousness but it is because
of lack of my krishna consciousness.
If I am properly situated
in krishna consciousness like we can
see from the example of history
of great devotees even physical
persecution will not
disturb a devotee.
What to speak of few
unkind words if somebody
speak so this is very important
so when a person completely
surrenders to krishna
he maintains this consciousness
there is no question
of anybody bullying over
nobody has power devotee is liberated
he does not offer his remote control
to anybody you please press buttons and
make me dance the way you want no
spiritual life awards
liberation so devotee is not at all
disturbed by anybody
so anytime if I have any disturbance in my
life I should work on my krishna consciousness
and the result of my krishna consciousness
is I don't agitate others
I am not agitated by others
so these two things
so we should try to practice as much
as possible meditate upon it write
about it preach about it and
follow krishna consciousness very nicely
so that we can develop this consciousness
and then
he studied
happiness and distress
in previous shloka krishna has mentioned again
he is mentioning this verse so this point
is very very important this we do not
realize we are working
very hard to mitigate the pains
of our life
and we are working hard to increase
the happiness of our life
physical happiness or distress
material happiness or distress
so devotee should not
try to endeavor to
increase material comforts
or material pleasures and reduce
material pains
but devotee should simply try to satisfy
krishna and thus he is indifferent
to these external things which are just
situated on external physical and
mental level so devotee is not
at all disturbed by physical
pains pleasures
fearfulness or external agitation
and such a devotee is very very
dear to krishna who is always satisfied
and disturbed by
external changes
anapeksha shuchirdaksha udasino
gatavyataha sarvarambh parityagi
yo madbhaktasame priya
anapeksha
devotee
Srila Prabhupada explains very nicely
a devotee who is not dependent
on the ordinary course of activities
and what is this ordinary
course of activity you can read the purport
Prabhupada explains
what is our ordinary course of activity
we are all working very hard to get money
that is the sum and substance of life of all
people then with money they want some other thing
so Prabhupada explains money
may be offered to devotee but
he should not struggle to acquire it
ordinary way of life is
that everyone is struggling
very hard to get money
so devotee is neutral
devotee is not dependent on these ordinary
course of activities
and it is a great misconception
in life that you need money to be happy
and practical example is the
so many devotees which he has
created in the movement
none of the devotees they go outside to earn money
and all of them are happy
the day of all the devotees
it starts with singing and dancing
it ends with singing and dancing every day
throughout the life
so what life can be happier than this
so thus we don't
depend on the ordinary course of activities
it is a misconception
that money is required
because the most advanced people of the Vedic culture
they are called Brahmanas
Brahmana will never take up a job
top three classes would never take a job
but Brahmana is so advanced he will not have
any savings also
Vaishya may have some savings, Kshatriya may have
saving, treasury
but Brahmana the most advanced person
now we are struggling very hard to earn money
and then we want to have a stockpile of money
for us and for future generations
Brahmana does not keep money even for the next day
this is called liberation
not that
financial independence means I have sufficient
money then I am independent, no
financial independence means I am not dependent
upon finances at all
finances don't affect my happiness and consciousness
so thus devotee is
not dependent on the ordinary course of activities
at the same time
he does not have any allergy with money
no, he can use all the money
in the service of Krishna
if Krishna sends money he will use in the service of Krishna
Krishna does not send, he does not care
because he depends, money is not required
for happiness but service of Krishna
is required for happiness
this is called Anapekshaha
so all this consciousness can be difficult
in the beginning
but eventually we have to attain this platform
and it is very much possible by Krishna Consciousness
and then Shuchi is the
next word
Shuchi means pure
so what is this
purity
because Krishna is supreme
pure
so now also when
any person comes to meet us
and he is
stinking very badly then we don't like
to meet that person
and Krishna is supreme pure
and if our heart is stinking with
lust and greed, lust and greed are no good feelings
and
why these people
are there in the jail who have got more lust and
greed who cannot control
they are put into jail
so similarly Krishna is supremely pure
he cannot tolerate this lust and greed
in the heart so person should be
completely pure
and this begins with coming to Satvuguna
even our body should be kept very very
Satvik then all these contaminations
of the heart can be taken away
so the first thing is that a person should
at least keep himself
and herself externally clean
as soon as we get up in the morning
so the slogan is
save water
people tell
so and one famous
celebrity is telling very famous Bollywood
actor so we should save water
I take bath very rarely once in a week
or even less than that and people
may have some such concoctions
but no taking bath every
day is very very important and at
least twice in a day
thrice is recommended but at least twice in a day
we should take bath and all of you
can practically experience this
morning in early morning you take bath
as soon as you get up because our body
becomes very tamasic when we are sleeping
and after you have done your
finish your office or business in the evening
again take bath and then you come for the sessions
and
even if you have got some work to do take bath
and continue and then you see you have a different
consciousness so externally
by regularly taking bath
at least twice in a day and
cold water bath cold water bath especially
important brings us to Satvuguna
and internally by always remembering Krishna
so internally
lower moods can affect us but always
if you are thinking of Krishna that is why DT Varshis
is important get up in the morning
and offer some incense flowers
to Krishna and
try to have that impression in the heart
throughout the day
in this way if you are always thinking of Krishna
then lust greet the contamination
dirt of the heart that will not affect us
and externally our body should be kept
clean by taking bath
twice in a day with cold water of course
unless there are health considerations
so this is called Shuchi maintaining purity
is also very very important
our wardrobe our dresses
our cupboards our beds
courts room everything should be very
very clean we should sweep it
mop it devotee means pick and span
very cleanliness is next to godliness
so we can simply judge the amount of
lust and greed present in persons heart
simply by analyzing their belongings
so Prabhupada once he was
there on the bank of Ganges
and it was
I think Ganga Sagar festival
or something
so where Kapil Muni's ashram is there
so Prabhupada would tell when I was small
I would come with my mother to this place
and Prabhupada was explaining
these things and then it shows a person
a sadhu sadhu or a person
he was there I don't remember exactly
and he was carrying his
lota and his
lota or the mug
it was very clean and very shiny
so Prabhupada explained just
see his mug is so clean
his lota is so clean
by this we can understand how
clean his heart would be
so thus if the heart is
filled with lower
modes then externally
also we would be unclean
and it
acts vice versa also if we start
keeping the external things clean
neat clean managed
then automatically heart also becomes
sattvic so our external
is the reflection of what we carry in our heart
so that is why cleanliness is
very very important so I request
all of you please be very very neat and clean
as soon as we get up make your bed
keep everything clean wash your dress every
day wear fresh dresses clean
dresses and
in Vedic culture Brahmana would
take would change dress
as many times he takes bath
so of course now even
that standard may not be followed not
required but at least every day we should change
our dress wear fresh dress
so this is called Shuchi and more
Shuchi you can understand through your mentors
and other devotees your Bhakti Vraksha
leads but we have to follow
these Shuchi standards there are Shuchi standards in
cooking and other things so
you can learn gradually so we are just discussing
the principles here and
another quality is Dakshah what is
Dakshah Dakshah means expert
what is an expert so Prabhupada
explains devotee is expert because
he fully knows
the sense of all activities of life
and is convinced of the authoritative scriptures
Dakshah means anybody
who can do task very very expertly
and what is the most expert way of doing
task
so if a person is
earning money
and he is nicely investing he has put
some money in mutual funds he has put
some money in livestocks
some money in dynamic stocks some money
in FD some money in some
gold some money in infrastructure
he is called expert oh very nice
very expert he is
in utilizing his money
but if he is not a devotee or a person
who knows the Vedas he will understand what
a waste of time what a waste of money
typical example is Bali Maharaj
Bali Maharaj was proprietor
of entire universe proprietor is Krishna
but he somehow he dethroned
all the authorized agents of Krishna Devatas
and he became ruler of the universe
and Bali Maharaj
what he did he offered everything to Krishna
Krishna approached him cheated
him and took everything from Bali
Maharaj but Bali Maharaj
did not rebel rather he offered
himself also
so Krishna told give me three steps of land
in two steps everything was covered the upper
portion and lower of the universe
so he told Bali where should I keep my third foot
so he told
I am there my lord
please keep your third foot on my head
and then Vaman they
became very very happy and he told
you have purchased me by your charity
so just see
this is called expert otherwise
you put your money everywhere you have to leave
all your funds money investments
and you have to carry on may not be
even in human body but
if you use all our money if
we donate all our money to Krishna
do charity like that
then we can purchase Krishna
and what is Krishna Krishna
is a person expansion
of expansion of expansion of whom
Lord Mahavishnu
is creating many many universes
from every single pore of his body
and that
Krishna person can purchase by doing charity
so that is why only
a devotee is expert because he knows
how to use every situation
every resource every activity
for the highest benefit
in the service of Krishna
and thus Bali Maharaj
had Lord Vaman Dev standing
as his guard always
when Raman came to attack he was thrown apart
simply by the push of toe
of Vaman Dev
so this is called expert so we have to understand
the science
how to become really expert in life by
dovetailing using everything
in the service of Krishna
Udaseena means
who is without any care
and Gata Vyata
he is free from distress
when he is so expert
when Krishna sees this devotee
using all the resources all the time
energy in my service
then such a devotee is always
kept happy by Krishna so he is Gata Vyata
he is freed from all distress
so we have to understand the science
if there is any pain in the head
then injection is not put medicine
is not inserted in the head
so injection is put in the nerves
or the medicine is put in the stomach
because the doctor knows the science
that okay pain may be there in this
part of the body
but this limb of the body the head
is part and parcel of this entire body
if any limb
is weak if any leaf of the
tree is getting dried we
put water not on the leaf but on the root
so anybody who knows the science
of absolute truth what
people do not know we should simply try to
satisfy Krishna and when Krishna
is satisfied we are part and parcel
of Krishna we automatically not
just get satisfied but derive
ultimate happiness and Krishna
tells sarvarambh parityagi
does not engage in any material
endeavor for sense satisfaction
but all the endeavors are there for Krishna's
satisfaction yo madbhakta
see again the same word madbhakta
such a devotee of mine is very dear to
me so Krishna is declaring
here very very clearly no gyani
no karmi only devotee is dear to me
no yonarishyati
na dveshti na sochati na kankshati
shubhashubh parityagi
vanu neither grasp pleasure or grief
he is so much
faithful to Krishna he understands
not a blade of grass moves without Krishna
if pleasure is there he is
grateful to lord if grief is there
he is equally grateful to lord
he thanks lord
hrdhva vapurbir vidadan namaste
he has complete faith if any grief
is coming in our life
then this is for my purification Krishna has
minimized and given it to me
so thus devotee is not
bothering at all for personal pleasure
or grief he always tries to give Krishna
pleasure that is the aim of life
na sochati na kankshati
neither limits nor desires
and who renounces
both auspicious and inauspicious
things so he does not
do inauspicious activities sinful activities
giving trouble to others at the same
time so this word is also very very
important shubh ashubh
parityagi so one person may wonder
ashubh should be left inauspicious
things should be left but why
shubh things good things should be left yes
good things should also be left
as we have discussed previously
also actually there is
nothing called good and bad on material platform
on material platform everything is bad
how much ever good we may do to
other people we cannot stop
their death neither we can stop our death
so real seva render
to any person is freeing
that person from the process of
unlimited anxiety
stress diseases and death
so if you do any good activity
that good activity is like
stealing money and
giving to others
and bad activity means
stealing from others
so no government tells oh you
robbed government treasury and you distributed
all the money this is very very nice
so similarly entire property belongs
to krishna those people who do charity
this is considered good work
but such philanthropic activities
from absolute platform
are not actually good because they neither
stop other persons death they neither stop
your death and if anybody
is being put to death being given capital
punishment means he or she is a
criminal if you don't commit
any crime there is no capital punishment
so that is why only that activity is
right which stops which saves us from capital
punishment death
and repeated birth
and that activity is devotional service
so if a person is not very
wise they don't understand this krishna
consciousness they are encouraged to do these
good activities so gradually heart is
purified but a person who is
wise should understand oh even I
do all the philanthropic activities
my death happens nature
is still angry with me so that is why
this is not actually good activity
so such a wise person bhakti maa na
devotee krishna tells he is very dear to me
and then finally
krishna tells
one who is equal to friends
and enemies who is equally
poised in honor and dishonor
so he knows that this is
simply a drama going on sometimes
you know we see in the movies
that two people who were friends
in previous movie in this movie they
have become enemies in a similar
fashion somebody is acting as my friend
somebody is acting as enemy helplessly
being controlled by laws of karma
so if you also start thinking oh he or
she is actually my enemy or friend
then we also come under illusion
so devotee treats friends and enemies
he is equal to everyone
he is well-wisher of friends well-wisher of even
enemies and
equally poised in honor and dishonor
so much torture of hard work corporate
work is happening because we cannot be
equally poised in honor and dishonor
we want to have honor we want to avoid
dishonor but devotee is equally poised
everybody is mad who does not
understand i am not the body mad
person praises you or criticizes you
how does it make any difference in our life
heat and cold happiness and
distress fame and infamy
who is always free from contamination
always silent and
satisfied with anything again krishna
mentions here satisfied with anything
so this thing has to be practiced
thrice krishna as mentioned in these qualities
and
aniketaha
we always are worrying about
when will i have my house
i need to have big house bigger house
but if you want to
become dear to krishna
then one who does not care
for any residence
who is fixed in knowledge
and engaged in devotional service is
very dear to me
so that is why the goswamis the sannyasis
they would live under a tree completely
dependent upon so basically
this yoga means
to
become one
in relationship
with god one to
agree to
just satisfy the lord
just like husband and wife
they agree we would satisfy each other
and thus they sacrifice
each other
so it is not that krishna is
narcissist or he is
too much demanding no
it is the expectation of any beloved
both husband and wife they
expect that you remain chased in the relationship
so that is why krishna
by telling us all these things he is not
trying to make our life
miserable but he is trying to give us
that pleasure of the heart love is the greatest
pleasure that we can have in life
that is why we see in the movies and in real life
also rich girl is there poor boy is
there they leave the girl leaves the rich
house so that she can live comfortably
with in a humble condition also
because this love is actually what we are seeking
so when a devotee
doesn't care for residence he is always satisfied
krishna so called some suffering is there
in life a devotee thanks
krishna this is the
these are the various instruments for developing
love for life love for god
and when devotees
behaving in such a manner
then automatically krishna controller
of everything he keeps
the devotees always very very comfortable
and ultimately devotee stops
this process of repeated sufferings
and krishna tells finally in the
last verse of this chapter
so such a devotee has no other
aim in life his aim is
not to do such a work that
even after i'm gone people should keep on clapping
about me what is the use of
such claps or i should leave so
much money that many generations should enjoy
nobody can enjoy unless they
serve krishna how much ever rich or famous
a person can become so his goal in
life is simply to have association of
krishna engage in service of
krishna so krishna tells he
follows who follows this imperishable
path of devotional service
and you completely engages himself with
faith making me the supreme goal is
very very dear to me so all such
previous qualifications it is being mentioned
here can be attained if simply
a person follows this last verse
what is that we have to follow this
path of devotional service bhakti yoga
completely engage ourselves
with faith in the service of
krishna and krishna should be made the
ultimate goal of life so
simply these things are there person is following
bhakti yoga complete engagement
is there with faith and
krishna is the ultimate
goal of life then all such qualities
automatically develop in the
personality of a devotee
