So examination which is considered one of the toughest to crack on earth and so much hype about it
and it is supposed to be cracked by most intelligent people. Papers are designed by again very intelligent people
and they have defined these things should be minimum criterion for cracking it and what is that?
Physics, chemistry, mathematics these many marks you have to score. There is individual cut off, there is overall cut off.
However there is no necessity felt to impart this most important knowledge which is of foremost importance in the Vedic culture.
And what is that? That is religion. So in the scriptures very beautiful description is given of Ram Rajya.
When Lord Ramachandra was ruling then it was so nice the entire kingdom the weather was very pleasant.
Now we see it rains suddenly sometimes it is flooding also everywhere every time in many places in Mumbai it floods.
Even though BMC is trying very nicely I mean the municipal corporation of Mumbai
but still they are not able to do anything it floods every time there are some walls which are falling some people which are suffering.
And in many parts of the country sometimes and we see in Germany also it happened it flooded
and they are telling why this climate is behaving in a very wrong way we are destroying our planet.
So when Lord Ramachandra was ruling there were no such conditions at all.
Rains would happen at the proper time ideally there is a time for rains it should not happen in the daytime.
It should rain at the night time when the people are taking rest then it rains down and in the morning they can work on their fields.
So God has designed everything very nicely very systematically so that we can live peacefully.
So rains would happen at the right time the right amount of rains neither over rains nor under rains.
The weather would not be too extreme neither too hot nor too cold it would be very pleasant to live.
And there was no disease at all nobody was diseased in the kingdom.
There was no physical anxiety no physical suffering no mental anxiety even for the animals.
Animals were also very very peaceful who are otherwise supposed to be always in anxiety.
The father would die and then the son would die.
So there was one such exception and thus that father went to Lord Ramachandra that my son has died because of died before me it is because of you.
You are the king you are not ruling properly.
So this is the responsibility of the king the scriptures mentioned and this science people do not know nothing is happening but happening by chance.
If the ruler is not good then the entire kingdom has to suffer if the ruler is good entire kingdom was happy.
No disease no death also death would come only to those people who desire it.
This is called Ramarajya and this was a situation in Maharaj Yudhishthira's time also and like this many great kings have been there.
If they follow laws of nature very nicely then won't be any problem at all.
So we want all these facilities we are doing lot of research and all the great institutes are trying to get rid of disease.
Disease is a very over ambitious objective they may not even conceive of it.
But anyhow they are trying to get rid of disease get trying to get rid of even death by so much of scientific endeavor.
So they want Ramarajya but without Ram how is it possible.
Can you have an apple without Steve Jobs it is not possible.
So he was sent out of the company but then it was not possible to maintain it without him so they brought him back.
So it is not possible to have Ramarajya without Ram simply if you bring Ram Ramarajya will come.
And if you want to take the Ram only out of the kingdom then you cannot have Ramarajya it is not possible.
So in a similar fashion we want to have peace in society we want happiness prosperity all these things.
But we do not want to have Dharma so the scriptures are mentioning this Dharma this religion is very very important.
The most important education we should be imparted to human being.
Why should be imparted what is the necessity.
The necessity is to elevate human being from animal platform.
No we are not on animal platform.
You are calling us animals see we have big institutes of research we have wonderful labs with most advanced machines.
So Srila Prabhupada very beautifully explains that if you simply do the activities which an animal is doing in a polished way you cannot call yourself a human being.
A crude example we can take suppose a sweeper is there and the sweeper is mopping the floor.
With a very advanced using advanced technology electric mopping machine.
Then a simple mopping cloth can we tell a sweeper you have become very advanced.
So you are manager now you are using electrical mopping machine.
No so because the activity same he will still be a sweeper.
Of course this is not to demean any designation or any activity.
So we devotees don't do it.
Even a devotee who is very advanced who has spent a long time in the movement you can find him cleaning the floor.
Even after 20 30 or 40 years and doing some menial services.
But material is do that for them this position is high this position is low they work very hard to rise higher.
So from that perspective you cannot tell that the sweeper has become a manager simply because he is using technology.
No because the activity is the same in a similar fashion the scriptures point out that activity remains the same.
A dog is eating directly with its mouth.
You may use forks and spoons but the activity of eating remains the same.
Dog is trying to find out mates on the street.
You are trying to find out on your phones on dating and mating apps.
But activity same you are finding out a mate.
So eating mating sleeping defending.
So thus it is eye opening shloka.
The opening shloka.
Ahar means eating.
Nidra means sleeping.
Bhay means fear.
You need to defend yourself.
And mehtun means sex pleasure.
These activities are same for human being as well as animals.
So what is the differentiating factor.
The differentiating factor is
So this is very important to understand.
Dharma the religion is the only differentiating factor.
Dharma is not there.
This science is not taught.
This education of religion is not there.
Then human being is like an animal.
He is simply doing those activities in a polished way.
So we cannot call them.
So right now you could be there in a big institute.
An ordinary institute or in no institute.
The activity remains the same.
All the institutes all the companies ultimate objective is Ahar, Nidra, eating, mating, sleeping, defending.
Arrangement for all these activities.
That's it.
Maximum budget of the country goes in defense.
The main downloadable content on the internet is that of pornography.
Mating and all the money people they spend is making their houses place for sleeping.
And of course eating is the is considered very great enjoyment.
Everyone wants to do that.
So all the human civilization is centered around the sensual activities.
So then we cannot call self that we are more advanced than animals.
We are just like animals.
So, Prabhu, what is wrong if we can remain like animal as Prabhupada was explaining.
So we should try to come to human platform at least in the next life.
If you lead a life like this, you may become dog.
You run the risk of becoming a dog.
So one student asked Prabhupada.
So what is the difficulty if we become dog?
That is very good.
So Prabhupada will just see their intelligence.
They are thinking becoming dog is also not bad because dog can mate openly in the street.
And we have to do so much botheration.
Dog is very free.
Unlimited partners you can find on the street.
So people do not think.
So they ask that what is the difficulty if we remain or we become animal?
Either in this life, we remain like animal or in next life.
If you transmigrate to animal species, what is the difficulty?
So the difficulty is if we remain on animal platform, then we will also suffer like animals.
You want to enjoy like animals, then you will suffer also like animals.
Animal is always we want peace in society.
But animals, can you expect peace from them?
So you can tell some dogs, please don't whine and fight with each other.
Be very, very peaceful.
Make a united dog organization.
And then you discuss out sort out the issues very peacefully.
Never bark.
It is not possible.
So we want civilization to behave like animals, but we want peace in the world.
So that is not possible.
That is why they made League of Nations after First World War.
Then they made United Nations Organization.
And so many other things are there which are going on.
War is also going on.
And war is increasing only across the world.
Nobody has been able to stop.
So just like animals, they fight a lot.
Even when the relationship is very intimate, there is mantis, that insect.
When male and female mantis, they meet.
Then the female mantis, after enjoying, she eats away, takes out the head of the male mantis.
But still so much it is fond of sex pleasure that it goes for that pleasure and loses its head.
So most of the times it is killed.
So that we see in human society also now it is happening.
Like animals, they kill each other after enjoyment sometimes.
Snakes, they kill their offsprings after birth.
And similar thing we saw in human society.
Mother, very educated.
They were running a media house and the daughter started blackmailing the mother for money and other properties.
And the mother killed the daughter itself.
And it was very brutal, cut into small pieces.
We don't wish to discuss very horrible things.
So if mother can kill daughter, what is the civilization?
The place where we are sitting in this society, one of the richest persons of the country.
And he's fighting with his daughter openly in the court.
So not to blame them, this is the ignorance which is spread in the society.
So there won't be peace even within the family.
There would be killing within the family.
What to speak of peace if we remain on animal platform?
Thus this Krishna consciousness, the science of religion is very, very important.
Krishna consciousness is summit of religion.
So the religion imparts so many rules and regulations to human beings.
So human being is identified by and human being is meant to follow rules and regulations.
If a dog does not stop at the red light, nobody will find a dog.
Nobody would arrest a dog.
But human being, if he violates, he would be arrested.
So human being is supposed to follow some law and order.
Animals, it is not expected from them.
So this thing is missing in society.
They don't want to follow any rules and regulations, just want to have a free life.
That is animal life.
Human life means more rules and regulations.
So that is why one ashrama system is given or various systems.
As per the capacity of the individuals, various religions have been introduced across the world.
And every religion is identified by a set of rules and regulations.
That is why people tell we don't want to be religious.
We want to be spiritual.
Religion means they don't understand what is the purpose and so many rules and regulations which appear to be mindless.
So, yeah, they may appear to be mindless, but actually they are very, very scientific.
Of course, some are manmade, which is of no use.
But bona fide religions are very scientific.
So if you follow these rules and regulations very nicely, then gradually a person can come to understanding, come to human platform.
And why coming to human platform is required?
First of all, you cannot solve all these problems of life.
Peace, happiness.
There is no question of peace, happiness in animal society.
So human being would do like that.
And why they cannot solve the problems of life?
Because only human being has got capacity.
If at all we are able to come to human consciousness of inquiring about Krishna,
Animal cannot understand Krishna.
So why understanding of Krishna is important?
Because Krishna is absolute truth.
So understanding of absolute truth is very important to solve the problems of life.
That is common sense, is it not?
An example, if you take a thief is there who is arrested every time.
And that policeman of that area, he arrests this thief.
And the thief thinks, my cause of suffering is this policeman.
Because he comes and arrests me every time I do some robbery.
So if I remove him out of picture, I kill him or do something, then I'll be safe.
So if that thief kills the policeman, will he be safe and happy?
No, he'll be more implicated.
Then he does further research.
He analyzes, no, not this policeman.
This policeman arrests me, but this judge is there.
And who is giving me punishment?
So if I remove this advocate or if I remove this judge, then I would be safe.
Let me kill the judge only.
I think he is the cause of my problem.
Will the thief be safe? No.
So in this way, what we are doing is same mentality, same procedure,
what thief is following to come out of the problems of life.
Animal also tries to solve the problem of life.
Animal feels hungry. Animal looks out for food.
In this dustbin, that dustbin here, their dog will find out.
And once the dog has eaten, then it is satisfied.
But dog cannot do ultimate inquiry.
So can I not make some arrangement, permanent arrangement of food
so that I don't have to stay hungry entire night?
Can I not make refrigerator or storage like these humans make?
Dog cannot think like that.
Dog cannot further think. Why am I feeling this hunger at all?
This hunger is not very good feeling.
Why am I suffering at all?
Why this human being is throwing stone upon me?
Why I am dog? Why he is human?
Why different machines are given to us?
Who has made this? Dog cannot inquire about this.
So that is why unless we go to the ultimate cause,
it is not possible to become completely happy.
So if the thief is intelligent, then the thief will understand.
Oh, it is not because of the policeman who arrests me.
It is not because of the advocate who tries me in court.
It is not because of the judge who writes a sentence against me.
It is not because of the jailer.
It is but because of myself.
I am breaking these laws. So I am suffering.
So this knowledge is completely missing from the human society.
And we think, oh, the suffering is because I do not have enough degrees.
Let me take one more degree. Let me do some courses.
Let me do MBBS, BTEC, CA, MBA, etc. CFA.
And then I will be happy.
I am suffering because money is not there.
Let me have money. Let me maximize my money. I'll be happy.
Oh, my partner is not good. Let me have a good spouse or partner.
Then I will be happy. Let me have a big car. I'll be happy.
This is animal mentality, animal mentality.
A person can become a billionaire or CEO for 10 companies.
He can become chairman on the board of many, many companies, but but a big animal.
Vedas do not give any special value to anybody who does not have understanding of religion.
Just like animal.
But as mentioned, he is animal walking on two legs.
So this is very important, very, very you could be cracking any examination from the perspective of reality.
Absolute truth. We are but animals.
If you don't advance in this knowledge of Dharma or religion.
So religion is very important.
Only then a person can understand.
Only a human being can think, oh, how can I solve the problems of my life?
Ultimately, I want to permanently solve all the problems.
Animals cannot think of solving all the problems permanently, and thus they will keep on suffering from these problems.
And inquiry has to be made.
Till the last point, we have to approach absolute truth, not relative truth.
The policeman is cause of suffering for the thief.
This is a truth, but this is relative truth.
This is not absolute truth.
Yes, the policeman is responsible.
Policeman arrests the thief.
Judge is also responsible for thief suffering because he writes.
But these are all relative truths.
These are not absolute truths.
The truth is that the thief is breaking law of nature and actually law of the government.
And the laws of government also are not absolute truth.
They are also not the absolute cause of suffering of the thief.
Then the thief, if he is intelligent, he should ask, why am I breaking these laws?
Because I think if I have money, I will enjoy.
But those people who are having money, are they enjoying in life?
Then the thief will think no.
So then what will make me happy in life?
Then he will understand that what is happiness?
Then he will understand happiness is of different level.
This is only physical happiness, happiness of my body for which I'm stealing money.
But I am not the body.
That is why I am not satisfied.
Neither wealthy people are satisfied.
So if I am not the body, from where have I come in this body?
Who has made all these bodies?
Who is putting us into these bodies?
In this way, inquiring, inquiring, he will come to the point of absolute truth and he's Krishna.
And only a human being can understand Krishna, absolute truth, and thus makes solution of all the problems of life.
Thus, it is very, very important to follow Dharma.
By following Dharma, a person will gain sanity, human consciousness, so that he can inquire what is absolute truth.
And then if he understands, then if he serves Krishna, the absolute truth, then he becomes happy.
So that is why I request all of you, do not get into this animal life thinking that some external arrangements will make us happy.
No, these are all relative arrangements.
Nothing can make us happy unless we completely surrender to Krishna.
Unless somebody completely surrenders to King, follows the instructions, there is a question of happiness.
So only when we are completely surrendered to Krishna, that is the crux of Bhagavad Gita, then only a person can be happy.
So the more we are having rules and regulations in our life, the more we'll be able to develop, first of all, inquiry, inquisitiveness to understand absolute truth.
And then absolute truth will be revealed.
So we should implement more and more rules and regulations in our life.
So that is why one ashrama system recommends for Shudra, some minimum rules and regulations.
And Vaishya, more rules and regulations. Kshatriya, more rules. Brahmana, more rules.
Brahmana also, when he becomes sannyasi, so many rules and regulations.
And finally, when a Brahmana becomes perfect, Paramahamsa, no rules and regulations.
So rules and regulations are bothersome, but they are required so that we can one day come out of the clutches of all rules and regulations, we become free.
Just like a diseased person,
A diseased person, if he eats right foodstuff as per the regulations of the doctor, takes right medicine, follows rules and regulations,
there will be no longer any need very soon to follow these rules, regulations, medicines and all.
But when he is diseased, he has to follow.
So that is why we should implement now as long as we are in this diseased condition, thinking I am the body, taking bodies life after life.
We have to follow more and more rules and regulations, not try to shun away the rules and regulations.
Of course, not whimsically under the direction of the scriptures, under personal guidance of a bona fide spiritual master.
So such people who are trying to understand absolute truth are of two categories.
One are personalists, another is impersonalist.
So Arjuna asked this question to Krishna, which of the two ways, two paths is more favorable, which is the best?
So Krishna, we saw how clearly he rejected the path of impersonalism.
So God is there as we discussed in the previous session, and God is continuously emanating energies from his body.
All that energy only is transformed into matter that we see around us.
The spiritual energy transforms into matter.
First, it transforms into mahat tatva.
This is how so entire real physics is mentioned in the Bhagavatam.
We are dabbling only with quarks, electron, proton and string theory, some energies.
Bhagavatam describes what is a real energy.
Real energy is mahat tatva that is coming from Brahma.
First Brahma transforms into mahat tatva and mahat tatva, a portion of mahat tatva gets transformed into false ego.
From false ego is generated sound.
From sound is generated ether.
From ether comes then other elements, fire, water, earth.
Earth is the grossest manifestation.
So that's all the matter that we see around us.
It is emanation of sound.
Sound was the original element created, the gross element.
So that is why the Vedic science was simply by chanting mantras they could produce anything.
They could produce the effect of brahmastra, the nuclear weapon, simply by producing mantras.
And the brahmastra was so precise that the child in the womb can be killed without affecting the mother.
This is the power of brahmastra.
An energy so huge, the entire universe can be destroyed by it.
All this is produced by mantra.
So mantra or you can use yantra.
Yantra is today's science using machines, gross technology.
Vedic technology is mantra.
They understand everything is coming from sound.
By producing right sounds you can have, you can produce gross manifestations also.
You can have desired children also by producing some mantras.
You can have weapons, you can have so many things, everything by mantra.
So now these brahmanas are not there.
They are brahmanas people who are trained in chanting the mantras.
So we do not see such effects now.
So all these mantra chanting, yajna and all is of no use in today's age.
If anybody is doing he is simply cheating.
That is a version of the Vedas.
First of all you try to ignite fire simply by chanting mantras.
Then you do any other show.
Using mastic you are igniting yajna, doing sitting some mantras.
It is only formality of no particular use.
So the Vedas describe very nicely that Krishna is there
and Krishna is emitting Brahma Jyoti and Brahma Jyoti transforms into matter.
So when people try to understand what is absolute truth,
what is the cause of all causes from where everything is coming,
some people are just able to understand up to Brahma Jyoti.
But they are not able to go to Bhagawan.
Absolute truth is understood in three phases.
So if they are not able to understand, go up to Bhagawan,
then that is a very great loss in life.
So those people who meditate upon Brahma Jyoti,
as you would have heard many times,
you have to merge in light.
God is light.
God is light as well as God is a person.
Because there is no difference between sun and sunlight.
Similarly, God and the light which is coming out of God's body.
That is one only.
But still there is difference between the person and the light
which is coming out of that personality of Godhead.
So if those people who follow this path,
a very long serpentine route, very troublesome path,
first of all, Krishna told,
This path is full of trouble.
And even if you take so many troubles,
it takes a very, very long time,
many, many lifetimes it takes to perfect.
And even after such perfection,
a person may not approach Krishna.
Krishna told,
They will attain me.
Ultimately, Krishna has to be attained.
Krishna very clearly tells that also,
although between me and Brahma,
my Brahma Jyoti, there is no difference.
Still there is difference.
That is why Krishna tells, uses the word too.
But Krishna tells,
But those people who are meditating upon me,
my personal form,
all their activities are engaged just for my service.
And they are always absorbed in my thoughts.
Their mind and intelligence is absorbed in me.
Then they need not work very hard.
I take them out from this process of birth and death.
I make them immortal, give them all happiness.
Whereas others, they have to depend upon their own ability
and take many, many lifetimes.
And they may not approach the personality of God.
And thus they may fall down,
even though they have come to a very high position.
So thus, understanding Brahma Jyoti as ultimate thing
is the greatest disaster that can happen in a person's life.
That is what Lord Krishna mentioned.
And thus, Krishna did not recommend this path to Arjun.
He told,
That is why the topmost path is much better than Gyan Yoga.
However, those people who cannot understand the science of Bhakti Yoga,
they have to follow this gradual process.
So let us see further verses.
Today we will see how Lord Krishna defines beautifully this yoga ladder.
You cannot follow this, follow this.
So what is the perfection of this yoga system that Lord Krishna explained?
So meditation upon Brahma Jyoti is different
and meditation upon Maam, personal form of Krishna, is different.
They produce different results.
For them, spiritual life is very quick.
Immediately, why it is quick?
I help them.
I make them immortal.
They need not endeavor on their own capacity.
So this is what Lord Krishna tells is the perfection.
Then we will see verse number 8 onwards.
Just fix your mind upon me, the supreme personality of Godhead,
and engage all your intelligence in me.
Thus you will live in me always without a doubt.
So this is a very important verse.
Mana means mind, adhatsva means fix.
Now here you cannot tell mai means something else.
Krishna has clearly told there are two ways.
You can meditate upon energy, you can meditate upon me.
That is called mai, Krishna is telling.
So on my personal form, as I have shown you, the two-handed form,
fixing the mind on this form,
my buddhim and your intelligence also should be absorbed in service of this form.
This is the perfection of spiritual life which is being recommended to Arjun.
Those who cannot understand that they can meditate upon light
and take many many lifetimes and risks
and take this long serpentine route of jnana yoga.
But Krishna is telling mai, you can see on the screen very clearly.
So those whose minds and intelligence,
they are completely absorbed in personal form of Krishna.
Now our mind and intelligence can be absorbed in my form,
how can I satisfy myself?
Or to some people or animals around me,
how can I feed my dog, take care of my dog,
or some family member, some society or country, like that.
But all these things do not satisfy either the people who are object of our meditation
or the person who is meditating.
But when mind and intelligence is absorbed in Krishna,
there is no doubt you will live in me always.
What is the meaning of living in Krishna?
So living in Krishna means living on spiritual platform,
Brahma platform.
So Brahma Jyoti is directly coming from Krishna, it is connected to Krishna.
Material energy is disconnected from Krishna,
just like the cow is having blood in its body,
that is internal energy of cow.
And the blood transformed into milk can be taken out of cow,
that is cow's energy but separated energy.
So in a similar fashion, this material world is separated energy of Krishna.
So we can live either on the material world or in the spiritual world.
And sometimes, even though a person is living in the material world
but he is not on the material world, on the material platform,
he is living in Krishna only, on the spiritual platform.
What does it mean?
A crude example we can understand.
Just like the embassies are there.
If embassy of one country is there in any country,
then that country has no jurisdiction upon embassy.
They cannot arrest the people of the embassy,
no laws and rules apply to the people of the embassy.
They are well protected, not by the people of that country
but by the country which runs the embassy.
Even though the whole country may be poverty stricken,
American embassies are there in some poor countries also,
but the people of the embassy will never be poverty stricken.
Their defense, their support, their salary, their living standard will be same.
The embassies are all very good.
Wherever America maintains its embassies, American standards.
It would be very very nice.
So in a similar fashion, we cannot tell those people are living in those countries.
Although they are living in those countries, but actually they are not.
They are not affected by the violence of that country, by the laws of that country.
That country may have some other local law,
but it doesn't apply to the people of embassy.
In a similar fashion, there are living entities who live in spiritual world,
living entities who live in material world.
But even though in material world,
some living entities appear to be there on the material platform, they are not.
If their mind is absorbed in Krishna and intelligence is absorbed in Krishna,
there is no doubt Krishna is telling.
Ata urdham na sanshaya niva sishyasi mai eva.
They are living on me.
So on which platform, which energy we are living, it depends what is there in our heart.
The energy, all the energies in the body, they come from the heart.
So the soul is living in the heart because of the energy of the soul, the heart pumps.
When the soul is out, heart stops pumping.
So either we can make heart the seat of material energy,
or if we are thinking of Krishna always, then Krishna controls us.
Then we are acting on spiritual platform.
Spiritual platform is full of knowledge, full of bliss and eternality.
Material platform is full of distress and so many other physical and mental anxieties.
So that is why the solution is even if you are there in a war-torn country,
you live in the embassy, not in that country.
So as soon as we get absorbed always in thinking about Krishna,
and our intelligence is also always absorbed,
how can I serve Krishna throughout the day we are thinking like that,
then there is no problem in life.
Person experience extraordinary happiness, death, disease, old age,
all these things do not bother at all.
This is the perfection of human life which is mentioned in this verse,
living in Krishna.
So Prabhupada requests as people would come Sunday love feast was a program
which was very famous when Prabhupada started the movie.
Even now it is.
So people would come once in a week and there would be lot of crowds.
So Prabhupada explained,
so please do not take to Krishna consciousness as a weekly recreation.
You may take it.
Okay, let me hear.
There is so much anxiety if I hear this class.
If I hear some Kirtan take prasadam, it becomes very pleasant.
My mood becomes good.
So do not take it as a recreation activity.
So, of course, it is good that you're trying to understand Krishna,
but this will not solve all the problems.
You have to live in Krishna.
And what is living in Krishna?
Mind intelligence completely absorbed in Krishna every moment of the day,
a person is thinking of Krishna.
This is called Samadhi.
This is a solution of all the problems and nothing affects a person.
However, you may be wondering how to follow this.
This is very tough stage.
So Lord Krishna being very merciful explains.
So it may not be possible for everyone.
This is very high platform.
In the universe, you'll find very less living entities who are able to have this platform.
This is Paramhansa platform.
Chittam means mind.
Therefore, my dear Arjuna,
O winner of wealth, if you cannot fix your mind upon me without deviation,
then follow the regulated principles of bhakti yoga.
You practice this yoga, bhakti yoga.
In this way, you will develop a desire to attain me.
So having such consciousness is very, very, very difficult,
but it is easy also somehow or the other.
If a person develops strong desire,
I want to attain this platform of constant meditation upon Krishna.
I want to rise, elevate myself on this devotional, loving, devotional, spiritual platform.
Then it can be attained.
But the challenge is we do not have desire to attain.
Simply if we have strong desire and eagerness, it can be attained.
Just like a sick person does not have desire to eat.
Similarly, on material platform,
when a person is having lusty and greedy desires,
actually our life is simply waste of time,
what most of the people are doing.
Simply if we have two chapatis in a day or maybe four or maybe eight for some people,
little food is available in any way in any easy profession.
You can do that.
Simply become a guard or a liftman
and simply keep chanting Hare Krishna Mantra entire day.
Keep on pressing lift buttons.
Very simply you can maintain yourself entire day.
And now smartphones are there.
Guards are watching movies every day.
You keep on hearing Prabhupada lectures and keep chanting Hare Krishna Mantra.
And then you will attain extraordinary platform of spiritual life.
But unnecessarily we are having greed.
No, I want, I don't want to be,
I want some name, fame, some position,
and all this is creating just more and more troubles in our life.
Greed, there is no limit to greed and lust.
I want to satisfy my lust.
So there is a lot of hard work in life and there is a lot of trouble.
People are not taught the science of remaining satisfied.
This is a subject which was taught in the Vedic culture.
When Krishna went to Gurukul, how to remain satisfied.
This is an art which people need to know, which they do not know now.
So anyway, so some or the other, if people develop desire,
then they can attain this perfection.
But desire does not come because of material desires, lust and greed in the heart.
So if a person follows rules and regulations of Bhakti Yoga very, very nicely,
under the guidance, personal guidance of spiritual master, not whimsically,
then it is possible.
Then a person will develop strong desire.
Just like a person takes medicine, eagerness to eat automatically awakens.
So strong eagerness to have Krishna, to make spiritual life perfect will happen automatically
in proportion to surrenderance to spiritual master,
in proportion to how many rules and regulations we pick up in our life.
So we should be very, very eager.
Yes, Prabhu, please tell me what next?
I picked up my chanting, I am doing reading.
What next I should do?
I have picked up fasting, I am getting up in Brahmurta,
I am doing seva, I am doing preaching.
What next I should do?
Which next rule and regulation I should follow?
You should be very, very eager to pick up more and more regulations.
The more we are regulated in our life, the more we are happy.
No, Prabhu, but I cannot follow this also.
These rules and regulations are difficult.
I cannot get up early in the morning.
When do I switch off my alarm?
I do not know. It is not possible.
Chanting, it is impossible for me.
I cannot, my mind is so, I cannot sit for five minutes.
People become, some minds are so disturbed.
People become agitated, they cannot focus on five minutes.
For five minutes also.
So Krishna is merciful, he is telling.
If you cannot follow the rules and regulations of bhakti yoga, then
If you cannot practice the regulations of bhakti yoga, then just try to work for me.
Because by working for me, you will come to the perfect stage.
You will come to the perfect stage for my purpose, for my sake.
You will come to the perfect stage simply by working for me.
So what does it mean working for Krishna?
So we have to understand what is Krishna's work.
Krishna has got only one work.
To save the devotees, destroy the miscreants, to establish religion.
When these principles are forgotten, I come here.
So to spread this knowledge of Krishna consciousness is only work of Krishna.
Becoming conscious of Krishna, Krishna's instructions.
So anybody who is helping Krishna in such endeavour, that is called Krishna Karma.
So if you cannot follow rules and regulations of bhakti yoga, then we can work for Krishna.
So just like any organization and any work, it needs organization, it needs capital, it needs land, it needs labour.
So these things are required for Krishna consciousness also.
You can offer yourself in the capacity of labour.
You work directly for Krishna. You become a preacher.
We need many, many educated, intelligent people who can dedicate themselves to spread this knowledge.
So if you can dedicate your life for preaching Krishna consciousness, that is best use of your abilities and education.
If you cannot do that, then you can use all your money for Krishna.
We need money also.
Money can be used for constructing temples and centers for spreading Krishna consciousness.
Or it can be used for publishing and distributing literatures and books.
So in this way or distributing prasadam.
So in this way, our money can be used for spreading Krishna consciousness.
Or if we have some land, especially if you are in Mumbai, please tell us it's very expensive here.
If you want one acre of land, it's 100 crores, 200 crores, very expensive.
So it is so difficult. So you can offer land.
So in this way, whatever things we need for a regular endeavour, regular business purpose, same things can be used in the service of Krishna.
Either one can work directly for Krishna or whatever work we are doing, we need not leave work.
You can be working in a very big position. You may be educated businessman or whatever.
But the result of work can be used for Krishna.
If completely it cannot be used, so much surrender is not there.
Still some personal desires are there.
I think if I kill policemen, I'll be happy if I get this money.
We are still stuck on the platform of relative truth.
We don't have faith in God. If I offer everything to God, everything is in control of God.
What is the question of stress in my life? That will develop gradually.
If that is not there, at least partially we can do it.
We cannot full time preach Krishna consciousness.
Take few hours out of your day. At least take one class.
Whatever you have understood, call your neighbours, discuss open with them, open and discuss Bhagavad Gita with them, Bhagavatam with them.
Do some Kirtan, sit with them, do some chanting.
Few hours in a day we can dedicate for preaching.
We cannot do every day. On weekends at least we can do to some capacity.
All our money we cannot use. Some portion of our salary income we can use.
But we have to work in this capacity.
Then we will come to platform of following the rules and regulations.
And eventually we will be able to come to Paramhansa platform, complete Krishna consciousness.
So if you cannot practice the regulations of Bhakti Yoga, then
Then you just try to work for me.
Working directly for Krishna or offering the results of your work to Krishna.
Both are called Krishna work.
So this is the third rung.
First is
The next is
Practice rules and regulations.
Cannot follow any rule and regulations. Just work for Krishna.
This is also not possible. I cannot work.
What to do? So Krishna is very merciful.
He is telling
You cannot do this also. You cannot work for Krishna.
There could be various reasons. Sometimes family may not allow.
Or you can be associated with some other faith.
Ignorance can be there simply. We don't understand work has to be done for Krishna.
Then what is the hope of such people when they cannot work for Krishna?
Then Krishna tells
There is no knowledge of Krishna working for Krishna.
Then various rules and regulations are mentioned. That is called
They may not be aware of Krishna.
Brahmana also may simply know I am not the body.
He may not understand further that who is the source of myself.
I am spirit soul who is the complete spirit Krishna.
This knowledge may not be there.
So simply do your duties of Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra.
But give up the results of your activities for any cause.
This is the minimum thing which is recommended for everybody.
Minimum thing recommended to become peaceful because this is the law of nature.
We have to understand we are not the proprietors.
If a cashier thinks so much money is coming to me or it should belong to me, that is a greatest mistake.
And that money if cashiers tries to enjoy, then that will only bring suffering.
That is why the Vedas tell as we have been discussing.
My wealth and my relative, which I considered mine, if I do not use for benefit of others,
then it will only bring more and more miseries in my life.
My family and my money will become the cause of my distress if I do not use in the service of others.
Please understand the arrangement of Krishna.
So all the species, cow produces milk, cow cannot drink a drop.
The plants, the trees, they are there.
All they produce, the fruits, the leaves, their bark and the wood is used in the service of others.
So all the species, they contribute like this very nicely for others,
but human being is hardly contributing rather making their lives also hellish,
killing other animals and other species also.
So we have to understand we are not the proprietor.
Mango tree is given ability to produce mangoes by God.
Mangoes are enjoyed by others.
Similarly, we can produce some nice literary work, nice money or nice piece of music and X, Y, Z.
All these things should be used in the service of Krishna.
If cannot be used in service of Krishna, at least the result of our work we should use for others.
That is why sacrificing for country or animals or human being society, this is also considered good.
If a person has no understanding of Krishna, at least you give up the result of your activity.
We have to understand we are not the proprietor of the positions that we may have in this life.
We are in charge just like Akash is in charge.
He cannot enjoy all that money.
These people do not know.
That is why you will find big, big temples constructed by many people, businessmen and Kshatriyas and like that.
But you will not see big, big houses in the Vedic culture.
Many temples thousands of years old you will find.
The description is there, you know, this Tirupati temple.
It is very, very old.
Lord Balram also visited 5000 years ago.
So people would construct huge Madan Mohan temple you see in Vrindavan, not even 1000, even 500 years ago.
You will not find the house of that businessman who made such a huge Madan Mohan temple.
But that temple is existing.
So people were knowing this money belongs to God.
As soon as they have money, they will use in the service of God.
But now people do not know it.
Even till some time back, you see so many temples are there just like Birla temples, you know, Birla family.
And so many temples they make.
They may not be having so many houses, but so many temples they would make.
So when I was, I spent some time in Pilani and because they are from Pilani.
So I went to the school, which is claimed to be the first school of the country.
So very nicely he has written Ganshyam Das Birla that Apna Kaam Kiye Ja Bhagwan Ka Naam Liye Ja like this.
Very nicely it is written on the walls.
And he was educating his children, his grandsons who was at MIT.
That do not live a life of sense pleasures and lead a very simple life.
And like this, very nice instructions have been given, imparted.
So but now the science people do not know.
So this is the basic thing. At least give up the results of your activity.
We cannot enjoy all that we earn.
Then there won't be any peace in life.
At least if a person gives this, then there would be peace.
There would be sanity.
When a person gets sanity, then Krishna explains.
So better than this is Gyaana.
When a person starts giving up the results of his activities, lust and greed is reduced.
And he becomes sane and he is able to come to platform of knowledge.
So Gyaana, platform of cultivating knowledge, it is better than simply doing social service, philanthropy, giving the results to others.
Then such a person leaves all such activities, completely reads the Vedas, tries to understand what is absolute truth.
This is called Gyaana. This is called Gyaani.
He has no desire of sensual enjoyment in life.
This is higher than Karmic platform.
And when a person advances in knowledge, then automatically he starts meditation.
Gyaana Dhyana Mishishyate Krishna is telling.
Dhyana meditation is higher than Gyaana also because he has understood what is absolute truth, some glimpse he has got.
And he is meditating, trying to meditate upon absolute truth.
And however, higher stage than Dhyana also.
Dhyana is considered very high platform, very difficult platform.
Without eating, drinking, yogi would be sitting in the Himalayas for hundreds and thousands of years.
But higher platform than that is Dhyana Karmaphalatyagas.
Karmaphalatyag, leaving the activities, the result of activities for Krishna.
So there are two kinds of Karmaphalatyag.
One is doing Tyag for social platform, for society, nation and other species.
Higher than that is Gyaana, cultivation of knowledge.
Higher than that is Dhyana, meditation.
Higher than meditation Krishna tells is Dhyanaat Karmaphalatyagas.
Renouncing the results of activities for Krishna.
So if you are able to donate your wealth to Krishna, then that is much much higher position than a yogi who could have meditated for thousands of years in the Himalayas.
This is the verdict of Bhagavad Gita.
So need not spend waste time on any such meditation.
You can be doing whatever activities you do, simply offer the results of Krishna.
And you become much much higher than the yogi who has got his Kundali perfectly developed, who has attained various Siddhis.
He is much much more advanced as per the verdict of Lord Krishna.
So thus Lord Krishna has very beautifully described this yoga ladder.
So highest platform is complete absorption in Krishna.
Person is thinking of Krishna and intelligence also is always thinking how can I serve Krishna.
If a person cannot do that, then he has to follow rules and regulations of Bhakti Yoga.
He cannot do that, then the work has to be done for Krishna.
If work also cannot be done for Krishna, then meditation.
If meditation also is not possible, cultivation of knowledge.
Cultivation of knowledge, spiritual knowledge, this does not mean mundane subjects, spiritual knowledge.
Cultivation of spiritual knowledge is also not possible, simply give up the results of your activities.
You can engage yourself in profession what you are doing, but give up.
Please do not enjoy all that you are having.
Then your yoga, your process starts.
This is the beginning of yoga when a person starts giving up the results of their activities.
So thus this is very nice knowledge, very beautifully explained by Krishna.
So I request all of you.
So please do not try to control this lust and greed in life.
Don't try to think like a thief trying to solve problems, removing the sources of disturbance,
relative sources of disturbance.
So Krishna is absolute truth.
He's a cause of all happiness.
So let us try to follow these things as much as possible and completely surrender to Krishna.
Only then when we live in Krishna, when we are always thinking of Krishna, serving Krishna,
then we'll experience an extraordinary kind of happiness which animals cannot think of,
which is much, much higher than sensual enjoyment.
And that is objective of human life.
