So we understood the objective, the methodology, various kinds of Yajnas, sacrifices.
Krishna mentioned this life engages us in various kinds of works.
And all those work should be done as Yajna, as sacrifice.
And if a person simply does Yajna and enjoys, if he simply does his work, does not do Yajna,
and he simply enjoys all the fruits of his activities, whatever he is producing,
then such a person is called a thief.
Stay in evasaha, and a thief will be punished by the laws of nature.
So Krishna told, Mogam paratista jivati,
a person who is living simply to enjoy all the results of his activities, he is living uselessly.
He is not making any advancement in his life.
Rather, he is going to be harassed very badly by the laws of nature in this life.
And after this life, there is degradation into animal species.
He could not use his human form of life.
Just like in any regular affair, if you do your duties nicely, you are promoted.
But if you do not do your duties nicely, rather, if you are on 10th standard,
and you are covering the syllabus of 9th standard, then you will not pass the examination.
In a similar fashion, we have got this human form of life.
But in this human form of life, what we are doing basically, if we analyze,
if a person is going to a very big institution, doing a very long course,
in a very long course, 10-year course, post-graduate, post-doc,
but ultimately, what is the purpose of all the activities?
And if we analyze nicely, there could be few exceptions, but mostly it is
ahar nidra bhaya mathunam evacha.
Ahar means eating, just like some scientists were telling.
In order to improve the research quality,
you should improve the stipend of the research scholars,
because they want to have more money.
That is why they want to quickly finish their research work,
and somehow they want to publish the paper, so that they can join somewhere
and start getting good salary of a professor.
So you increase their stipend so that they don't bother about money.
He is mistaken again.
Research work actually can be done by a person who is not at all interested in money,
not at all interested in material enjoyment,
because as we discussed, material enjoyment is addictive.
Any person having any sort of addiction, he cannot rise to the platform of knowledge.
So there is no question of gaining any knowledge unless the senses are controlled.
That is why the student is supposed to be brahmachari.
Brahmachari means he tries to control the senses.
Without controlling the senses, there is no question of coming to the platform of knowledge.
Not possible.
So that is why even if a person is educating himself,
if a person is doing anything, ultimately if he analyses the purposes,
to arrange the resources for material enjoyment,
something to eat, eating, mating, sleeping and defending.
And an animal is also very busy running on the street here and there the entire day.
His objective is also same.
Then if human beings also have same objective as that of animals,
then we will degrade ourselves.
We are not going to have, at best we can have a human body.
Otherwise, we are going to degrade ourselves to lower life forms.
And in lower life forms, the life is very, very horrible.
It is raining incessantly now in Mumbai.
And the animals for them, it is troublesome.
But for us, it is not troublesome.
But if you get animal form of life, then there is great trouble.
So that is why Krishna tells,
He has wasted his life.
If he has not sacrificed the results of his action, he has not performed yajna.
The science is not known to people.
But there is one more category of people who will not do yajna,
and they will not also be criticized or punished for that.
What is that category of people?
Let us see today here what Lord Krishna is next going to speak to Arjuna.
What is this?
Yes, text number 17 of chapter 3, Karma Yoga.
Translation
One who is, however, taking pleasure in the Self,
who is illumined in the Self,
who rejoices in and is satisfied with the Self only,
fully satiated, for him there is no duty.
So Arjuna was being recommended here by Krishna to do duty.
Why? Because doing yajna is important for self-purification.
And yajna is born of prescribed duties.
If you follow your prescribed duty very nicely, then you will be able to do yajna.
So that is why Arjuna, please do your duty nicely.
However, there is one category of people for whom there are no duties at all.
What is that category? That is mentioned here.
So duty or job is meant for people who are not satisfied in life.
Isn't it? If you are satisfied,
no, whatever is there with me, I do not want anything else,
then you will not go to office, you will not attend to your business,
you will not do other things.
But you have to do certain duties every day. Why?
Because you are not satisfied in life.
So anybody who is completely satisfied, there is no duty for him,
Lord Krishna is telling here.
Vedas recommend duties anywhere and everywhere.
At every step of life, till your death bed, you have duties to perform.
But for a liberated soul who is taking pleasure in the self, there is no duty.
Srila Prabhupada explains.
Then how can he purify himself?
So it is told, no, due to his being Krishna conscious,
all impiety within is instantly cleansed.
An effect of many, many thousands of yajna performances.
Oh no, Srila Prabhupada is a devotee.
That is why he is quoting such a thing.
Yajna, it is so difficult to perform a yajna.
So much money you have to spend, so many great brahmanas you have to involve.
And those brahmanas also, they chant,
they have to practice mantra chanting very, very rigorously.
And they have to be invited.
Then you have to do this elaborate arrangement.
All the devatas you have to invite.
It is so difficult to perform yajna.
And many thousands of yajna performances can be surpassed
simply by being Krishna conscious.
How is it possible?
No, the Vedas also tell.
A person is pure, impure, in whatever situation he is.
A person who thinks,
means lotus, Aksha means eyes.
Lord's eyes are very beautiful like lotus petals.
Any person who is thinking of Krishna,
he becomes completely pure inside and outside.
So Rajas and Tamas, mode of passion, ignorance, are completely cleansed
simply by thinking of Krishna.
So that is why Krishna tells various processes in Bhagavad Gita to Arjuna.
But then finally he tells,
now I am going to tell you the most secret knowledge.
Now here the most secret, the topmost knowledge.
What is the topmost knowledge?
Simply think of me always.
Become my devotee and worship me.
This is the most secret knowledge.
So that is why any person who is Krishna conscious,
he need not do any other activities, any other duties.
Simply by his being Krishna conscious, his heart is completely cleansed.
By such clearing of consciousness,
one becomes fully confident of his eternal position in relationship with the Supreme.
His duty does become self-illuminated by the grace of the Lord,
and therefore he no longer has any obligations to the Vedic injunctions.
So now our consciousness is not clear.
As we discussed previously,
a drunkard is not clear about where he is situated, what he is supposed to do,
to whom he is talking, he is not conscious.
His consciousness is not clear.
In a similar fashion, our consciousness is not clear.
We are thinking I am this body, man, woman, bird, animal, etc.
All this is because of presence of Rajas and Tamas,
the two modes within our heart, within the body.
So when the heart is cleansed, a person can very clearly understand
and he can become, Prabhupada mentions here,
one becomes fully confident of his eternal position in relationship with the Supreme.
He is able to remember who is God, what is my relationship with him.
Such a Krishna conscious person is no longer interested in material activities
and no longer takes pleasure in material arrangements
like wine, women, similar infatuations.
He is completely satisfied in his own self.
Externally, it may be difficult to understand the position of such a self-realized soul.
When we are coming from Vrindavan trip,
the trips are very very important for spiritual advancement.
We go there, we see those spots where Lord has performed his pastimes
and especially when we go with the devotees, they explain us
and always there is chanting here in Kirtan going on.
So in this way, it is very very rejuvenating,
very important and potent for spiritual advancement.
So once we are coming back in the bus
and then we saw one man was there, almost naked
and he was standing in the middle of the road near traffic signal
and on the junction of the road, he was acting like a traffic police.
He is indicating the vehicles to stop or move
and he is very very sincerely engaged.
He feels as if he is controlling the traffic.
But no, traffic is being controlled simply because of the lights, traffic lights.
The vehicles are stopping moving, but he is thinking,
No, I am controlling things, I am stopping the traffic, I am regulating it.
So this is called mad man.
In a similar fashion, Lord Krishna also tells, we will see in Bhagavad Gita.
Krishna tells,
Prakriti means nature.
Everything is being done by Prakriti, Goddess Durga.
She is the controller of all the energies of this universe.
So under her direction, everything is going on within the universe.
Krishna does not directly take care of material universe.
Durga acts like a chaya of Krishna.
Everything happens under the control of Goddess Durga.
Like today's Ganesh Chaturthi, Lord Ganesha, Vignaminashak he is called.
He is also another in charge.
And how he is able to destroy all the vignas, all the obstacles in our life.
So very nicely it is mentioned in the Brahma Samhita.
Always he keeps the lotus feet of Krishna on his head.
In this way he purifies himself.
And thus because he is purified being in constant touch with Krishna,
he is able to destroy all the ill effects, all the obstacles on the path of his devotees.
So Durga, Ganesha, they are all various Lord Brahma.
They are all in charge of various departments here.
So everything is being controlled by the demigods.
And the chief goddess of material world is Durga.
So Durga has plans just like the government makes plans.
We are very much stressed out at times.
So things are not changing.
World is bad, nation is bad, country is bad, family is bad.
Or person becomes very stressed.
I cannot change my nation, cannot change my neighborhood, cannot change systems,
cannot change family members and it becomes very stressed out.
Because we think we are in control, we can change things.
No sir, you cannot change anything in this world.
You cannot give any material happiness to anybody.
You cannot give any material distress to anybody.
Happiness and distress comes to us as per our activities of this life and previous life.
We cannot have any change, any impact.
But because of false ego, I can do things.
Especially those people are especially foolish, grossly in ignorance.
They think, oh, I can bring a change in this world.
I can do something.
How can you change, sir?
If a person has killed somebody, government will make sure that he finishes his term of capital punishment
or he is to be hanged till death.
Government will not allow any person to do any welfare to that criminal.
Similarly, if the government wants to give reward to a person, a brave soldier who has fought for the nation,
government will make sure that he gets the due rewards.
Nobody can stop the rewards also if government decides to give.
So this is how the nature is working.
If you perform good activities, you suffer, you perform bad, you enjoy, you do bad activities, you suffer.
So we can change our life.
Materially, we cannot change anybody's life.
So then what should I do?
We can act spiritually.
If we engage them in the service of Krishna,
So the science people do not know.
Very, very hard.
One more certification, one more course, one more degree, one more marriage, one more movie,
one more cricket.
And people think that will give us happiness.
No, sir, we are suffering.
Life is very, very simple.
Take the instructions of God.
Why we are suffering?
Because we have broken laws of nature.
That is called karma.
How to come out of it?
Lord Brahma is telling first person of this universe.
When a person engages in the service of Krishna, then his karmas are burned
and then you become happy immediately.
That is why devotees are always satisfied.
So like earlier, also people ask how to reach this stage taking pleasure only in the self.
No, we need something, some enjoyment.
So only a person who is engaged in the service of Krishna, he is actually self satisfied.
No other person can do that.
So yes, as a matter of duty, we perform our activities.
Why?
We will see in the shlokas.
But we have to understand.
All the activity should be done only for the pleasure of Krishna.
Then the activity becomes karma yoga.
Activities become bhakti.
And then we are able to break the cycle of karma, which traps us.
And thus we become happy in life.
And for those people who are already happy for them, there is no duty.
So this is one category of people.
Just like this madman was there.
He was thinking that I'm traffic police.
I'm regulating the traffic.
And we also think like that.
We are doing something.
Krishna tells only grossly foolish person thinks I am the doer.
I am changing things around.
No government has decided to make the govt.
Government has decided to make the golden quadrilateral or make or
renovate the railway stations.
Then it is going to happen.
Now we can decide to act as construction engineer or some data scientist or HR
manager for those projects which have been decided to be implemented by
government in a similar fashion.
Material world has got certain plan.
You can choose in which capacity you want to add basis that you will enjoy or
suffer.
But we cannot change anything.
Plans of Mother Durga under direction of Krishna are implemented in this world.
Just like we saw how Bhagavatam is predicting.
Shabtas Trinshat Shatotrasya.
137 years Maurya dynasty would be there.
Other dynasty would be there.
And then one brahmana will come uproot.
And all these things are mentioned.
So how the world is going to function that is higher control.
We can choose where I want to act.
I want to act in position of engineer.
I get good salary.
I want to work in the position of a cleaner.
I get a little less salary in this way.
I can change my life.
So this is one category madman.
In between are the people who are partly mad.
That is majority of the civilization who are in Rajasik.
In Rajas mode of passion.
And then when a person is able to completely surpass these modes of passion and
ignorance.
He is called a paramhansa, a liberated soul.
And the liberated soul also becomes a madman.
He also behaves exactly like a madman.
So externally speaking, you will not be able to differentiate this person is
materially mad or he is very exalted spiritual personality.
Externally speaking, both you will find on same mad platform.
Both could be without clothes, roaming without any care, totally unaware of the
surroundings.
And this is what happened with Shukadev Goswami.
The entire Shrimad Bhagavatam which we study, it is spoken by Shukadev Goswami.
Shukadev Goswami, as soon as he took his birth, he walked out of his home without
any clothes on his body.
Like a madman, he was walking everywhere.
So every morning he will go when the cows are being milked, he will take little milk,
drink it and that is sufficient for his eating for entire day.
Again, he would roam like a madman because he is completely absorbed in thoughts of
Krishna within the heart.
So he is not at all aware about what is happening in the world outside, which is
temporary.
So anything which is temporary, we need not get attached to it.
Just like we travel in train or plane, we are not very enthusiastic to have
relationship with some people.
We know we are traveling.
We'll get down anyway in some time.
So in a similar fashion, the liberated personalities, they are completely realized
that they are eternal.
So that is why they don't take interest at all in this material world and why to
take interest in this external enjoyment when there is unlimited enjoyment within
the heart.
24 hours they are meditating, whether walking, sitting, talking on Krishna.
So Shukadev Goswami was there.
Haridas Thakur was there.
The six Goswamis were there.
They were ministers in Bengal government, but they took sannyas.
They came to Vrindavan and they gave up all their possession.
They had boards full of gold coins when they retired.
So opulent they were.
But they gave up everything.
And then every night under a tree, they would sleep just wear a loincloth in a garment.
That's it.
Nothing else.
Kanthi mala, loincloth and chanting beads.
This is what they had.
Just imagine if chief minister is living like this prime minister.
So Roop Goswami, Sanatana Goswami, Raghunath Das Goswami, all of them were very, very rich,
filthy rich, very, very powerful personalities, topmost ministers.
But they were living like that one night under one tree.
Again, they would move on.
So some people ask proof of spirituality and spiritual life.
So we said, we can see this is the proof.
A person is satisfied with not even having a tree for his protection every night, a different tree.
And they are moving like that.
So unless a person is very much satisfied how he can give up millions of gold coins and such positions.
And it is not just about, oh, no, some people can do that.
Some Goswamis.
Yes, I agree.
Some people are very exalted in spiritual life, but not everybody can do that.
No, sir.
Please read Bhagavad Gita.
In Bhagavad Gita, Krishna mentions you can have a very fallen very.
You may have no eligibility for spiritual or material life.
But who takes specific shelter of me, he also can attain perfection of life.
This process is so powerful, Krishna consciousness.
So the same things were being displayed by Srila Prabhupada's disciples, also the Western disciples.
Who had no qualification and they were materially mad people.
They were also living without clothes in nudist societies in US.
They wanted to enjoy a world like anything.
And all those Mataji sannyasis, they tell we were never satisfied having such a life.
Living like animals without clothes, drinking, sleeping anywhere, doing anything.
And then they came to India, Vrindavan, and they were completely satisfied.
Now also will find many devotees who have settled.
They are not going back.
Why they are not going back to their developed nations.
We want to move abroad.
The aim is no problem.
I've done MS here.
I want to settle here only.
I don't want to come back.
No money in India.
But those people leaving all those situation, they were born in such conditions.
They have come here and they are satisfied.
This is the proof.
If any person is not leaving his company, it means the company is very nicely taking care of the person.
In a similar fashion, if a person can give up so-called all the material pleasures
and is satisfied simply by chanting the names of Krishna, it means this is the proof.
And on the material platform never satisfied.
You need thousand things for your satisfaction.
Need money.
Also fame.
Also this situation, that situation, this person, that person, this weather,
everything you want in place still dissatisfied.
And the devotee is nothing.
Kopi na kanthashritau.
Only Kopi is there, loincloth kanthi is there.
And that's it.
He's satisfied with that.
Chanting the names of Krishna.
So this is the proof.
And when this consciousness is freely being distributed, you can take it anywhere.
You need not live like Goswami's in jungle.
In your own place, you can do this thing.
So which saint person should refuse?
It is very simple process.
So shut Goswami's were there.
And Bharat Maharaj also was like that.
And Haridas Thakur was like that.
And many other such great personalities.
In India, still we will find many, many personalities.
And Rishabhdev was like that.
He is incarnation of Krishna himself.
He was also king of entire planet.
Father of Bharat Maharaj.
He also was like that.
He took sannyas and he was walking like a madman, like a naked man.
And his son Bharat Maharaj, he also was emperor of the whole world.
That is why our country is called Bharatvarsh.
Earlier entire globe was Bharatvarsh.
So why people call it fiction?
We don't call, we don't find any city Potterland.
So inspired by Harry Potter.
So we have all the cities.
We have Washington D.C.
Because there was George Washington.
We have New Delhi.
Delhi because Dillu king was there.
We have place Pilani because Pilani Jat ruler was there.
We have Tata Nagar because the Tatas are there.
Similarly Bharatvarsh because Bharat Maharaj was there.
So first of all, you cannot tell why from where this name is coming.
And the book which is explaining you are telling that it is mythology.
So all this was a scam because Britishers were very much frustrated.
These people don't take jobs only because people were thoroughly satisfied.
This Vedic education, how to remain satisfied in any condition of life.
Today's education always remained dissatisfied foolishness.
So because they were satisfied, they were not taking up any duties and jobs with the Britishers.
So they thought we have to remove this education system.
So all these things, they started creating these theories.
It is mythology and these are not your books, which you are studying.
This is some Aryan cultures, some invasion happened and all these things.
But the proof of the pudding is in eating it.
When we see that people are so much satisfied that they can give up the great opulent position,
then definitely they would be getting some extraordinary pleasure.
So thus for such a person, because he is very much satisfied, there is no duty.
All the duties are made so that person can reach such a stage of unlimited happiness.
And if a person is already situated on that platform, then no duty for that person.
Haridas Thakur was sitting in the cottage in the dead of the night.
The prostitute approached Haridas Thakur.
Haridas Thakur should have left the place immediately.
Sannyasi is not supposed to remain in association with women.
Sannyasi is brahmacharis. They are supposed to maintain distance.
These are the injunctions.
But how Haridas Thakur, he kept on sitting and she openly expressed that I want to embrace you.
I want to enjoy with you.
Haridas Thakur told, OK, we will enjoy it. Please give me some time.
I have to finish my chanting. I've taken a vow to chant.
He kept on sitting in the same cottage.
Why? Why did he violate the Vedic injunctions?
No, because he's completely satisfied, situated on liberated platform.
So that is where rules and regulations don't apply upon that person.
He will not get carried away by any laws of nature.
He will never get attracted.
So Haridas Thakur stayed because he took compassion upon the poor soul.
This soul has approached me for whatever reason.
It is my duty to deliver her.
So that is why in order to deliver the prostitute,
Haridas Thakur neglected the Vedic injunctions and he kept on sitting in the same place.
So all the Vedic rules, regulations, everything are meant to take us to platform of Atmarati.
And if a person is situated on that platform, no duty for him.
Then Lord Krishna mentions,
A self-realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his prescribed duties,
nor has he any reason not to perform such work,
nor has he any need to depend upon any other living being.
So a self-realized soul has no purpose to fulfill his prescribed duties
and he has no purpose to give up also.
So that is why it is not necessary that a self-realized soul always will be walking like a madman.
He may walk like a madman also,
but he can be acting just like a perfect materialist also because he is liberated.
There is no reason for him, just like for those people who are criminals,
they have to live inside the jail.
But the jailer, he can be outside, he can be inside, he can go anywhere.
He is not controlled by the sentence of the court.
In a similar fashion, self-realized soul, you can find him inside the jail, you can find him outside the jail.
Self-realized person can be like completely unconcerned like Shukde Goswami,
like Haridas Thakur, like the Goswamis, like Rishabh Dev, or he could be like a perfect materialist.
Sometimes they pass on, Srila Prabhupada explains, like a businessman, like a doctor,
engaged in normal profession because they don't want to show themselves as great devotees or transcendentalists.
So they would be doing their regular duties very nicely,
but they are completely absorbed in service of Krishna.
So he is not obliged, but he can be doing anything.
Therefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities,
one should act as a matter of duty, for by working without attachment, one attains the supreme.
Now one may ask, so how can I attain that position of atmarati,
where all my, I need not do, need not follow any rules and regulations,
I am completely rejoicing in the self only.
My body, my mind will not demand any external arrangements.
So here Lord Krishna is mentioning, that is why this chapter is called Karma Yoga.
Therefore, God is giving this instruction, perfect instruction, how to reach that platform.
Therefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities, one should act as a matter of duty.
Why, what will happen, by doing duty without trying to enjoy the results of the duty,
for by working without attachment, one attains the supreme.
So there are two kinds of people, impersonalists and personalists.
Some people want to just merge in the Brahma Jyoti,
the spiritual effulgence, light coming out of body of Krishna.
Some people want to serve Krishna in the spiritual world.
So for both of the people, supreme means Brahma Jyoti for one category of spiritualists,
and it means the personality of God for the devotees.
So both of them can attain their desired result simply by this activity.
Simply if they do their duties very nicely and they are not attached.
Yes, Prabhu, I am not at all attached to my money.
I just keep on stocking, piling it up in my bank account.
No, that means attachment.
So that is why Yajna Artha, a person has to sacrifice, give up the results of his activities.
So if a person tries to enjoy the results of his activities, then he is miser.
He has wasted that money for temporary pleasure.
But the same money, if he uses as Yajna for satisfaction of Krishna,
then simply by doing his own duties, a person could be fighter, soldier,
he could be doctor, he could be engineers.
Any person can simply do his activities.
The fruits of activities he is not attached, he offers to Krishna,
and he can attain this stage of atmarati evasyat.
So therefore now, Krishna is imploring Arjuna,
Krishna, you are telling me I should engage as a fighter, kill so many people and all this.
So somebody may ask, so has somebody attained success by this process?
So Krishna is telling yes.
Even kings like Janaka, Janaka Maharaj was the father of mother Sita
and others attained the perfectional stage by performance of prescribed duties.
So yes, I am prescribing this method.
It is very old and ancient method, eternal method of perfection.
And people have perfected their lives.
You are not the first king Arjuna who is being recommended to follow.
Kings like Janaka were able to perfect their lives by following this process.
They attained perfectional stage by performance of prescribed duties.
Therefore, just for the sake of educating the people in general, you should perform your work.
So this is very important.
So that is why some students, they tell us that Prabhu, what is the use of studying all this?
And instead, all this time I can engage myself in just studying Bhagavad Gita and preaching Bhagavad Gita,
distributing books, distributing this knowledge.
What is the use of this temporary knowledge?
So what he's stating is correct.
And if he entire day studies Bhagavad Gita and distributes the Bhagavad Gita,
he preaches this message to others, that would be very nice.
But then a negative message will go to the people.
And he's realized that, oh, this knowledge is so important.
So there is no need of material education, but not everyone may be realized.
And it may give negative impetus to the people to do their prescribed duties.
So for ordinary people, doing their prescribed duties is very much important.
And they offer the result of their prescribed duties to Krishna.
So that is why I recommend all of you to do your duties very, very nicely.
We need not over push, over endeavor, do any over endeavor for our duties,
but please do it very nicely and very responsibly so that people may not point out
because this person is taken to Krishna consciousness.
That is why he is now failing in life.
If we pass or fail, it depends upon Krishna, upon our past karma who Krishna wants to control it.
But as a matter of duty, we should try our best.
And if we stand nicely, follow the process nicely, Krishna will guide us to do our prescribed duties also very, very nicely.
So Krishna consciousness does not mean a person becomes loser in prescribed duties.
That is why we tell our students, if you are studying, you please study nicely, top in your class,
then automatically people will be attracted to Krishna consciousness.
If you are doing your job very nicely, you do your job very, very wonderfully.
So then people will ask you how you are able to do so nicely.
And then you can educate them in Krishna consciousness.
If they see your performance is going down and they will be scared of you,
I take up this chanting, my performance also will go down.
So what I'm telling is performance can nevertheless go down.
It's not in our hands. But as a matter of duty, we should try to do.
And if you sincerely pray to Krishna, I am not at all doing this for my satisfaction.
People who have started best of the companies have died in dissatisfaction.
Alexander conquered the entire world and died in dissatisfaction.
Steve Jobs made the best company of the world.
He became the best CEO, but he was dissatisfied on his deathbed.
So I'm totally convinced by doing this thing.
I will not be satisfied, but please help me because I will be setting an example
to other people and they may not go away from Krishna consciousness.
So in this way, please bless me.
So Krishna is therefore telling Arjuna.
Therefore, just for the sake of educating the people in general, you should perform your work.
How the work should be done, you show.
So just like we had very nice devotee in one of the top colleges of the country.
And the devotee was very, very simple.
So I met some other professors of that college and they were very much inspired.
We go into the house of devotee and we live here such a simple life.
He does not have any vehicle of his own.
He lives in the campus, comes on bicycle to teach, and then he goes back on bicycles every day.
And in his house, you will not find much furniture.
Also, some mats are there, some simple chairs are there, and that's it.
Very, very simple life.
And even those people, those students who are not interested in Bhagavad Gita and Krishna consciousness,
they were so much inspired by seeing his behavior.
They would also approach him to seek his counseling for academic or personal inquiries.
So in this way, devotee, he acts on a very exemplary level just for the sake of educating people in general.
See, this is how work should be done.
So do not think by getting more money, building up luxuries around you, you'll be happy.
Simple living, high thinking, engagement in the service of Krishna.
So this is what we all have to.
So we cannot display this thing because our agency is there to spread this knowledge.
So we full time have come into it to spread it.
But most of you would be working outside so you can perform in this way.
Set an exemplary act, sleep on time, get up on time, eat very healthy food, only prasadam to Krishna.
Have a very, very simple life.
And in simple life, you always remain blissful preaching Krishna consciousness.
Then you'll be able to attract many, many people also.
So these are the activities of liberated soul.
Liberation does not mean you'll fly in there or do something.
There are two kinds of liberation.
One is when you leave this body, you don't take another material body and you enter the spiritual realm, spiritual world.
Another stage is Jeevan Mukta.
You are in this body, but still you are liberated.
Bodily changes are not affecting you.
So in either of the cases, the liberated soul, the liberated platform is not of zero activities as Lord Krishna mentions here.
So they are also engaged in activities.
But all these activities are for satisfaction of Krishna or for the guiding general masses into Krishna consciousness.
