May sarvani karmani sanyasya dhyatma chetasa, nirashir nirmamobhutva yudhyasva vigatajvaraha.
May sarvani karmani sanyasya.
So there are two kinds of materialists which exist.
One kind of materialist, he seeks enjoyment in the sense objects.
But then as those of you who have been very regular in Bhagavad Gita sessions and it is common sense also.
After attaining our objects of enjoyment, a person feels frustration and dissatisfaction.
So then he thinks, oh, after getting all these sense objects, my life has become more miserable.
So let me leave all these sense objects now.
So they are called tyagis, bhogi and tyagi.
And two kinds of rules and regulations are mentioned in the scripture for bhogis and tyagis both.
So now because some people may become envious of Krishna.
So Krishna does not wish us that we should enjoy here in this world.
What is this that we have to serve God, we have to engage in his service, think of him.
So no, Krishna is not so rude and Krishna is not
such an insensitive personality.
If you want to enjoy independent of Krishna, Krishna gives opportunity.
If you want to enjoy just like you want to dive into the ocean.
So then there are some rules and regulations in that portion.
Do not dive. That is very dangerous.
You will have shocks over there in this portion.
Be very cautious at this time.
Do not go. There is a chance of high tide.
You may get swept away.
This is the proper time in this time you go.
And then when you are going, you wear some life jackets and also that you can be saved.
So with all these precautions, if a person enters into the ocean,
then there are chances that he will enjoy and then he will return back again safely.
So in a similar fashion for those living entities who wish to enjoy here,
Krishna has laid down some rules and regulations.
You follow those rules and regulations.
Even then there are disasters, accidents do happen.
But nevertheless, if you follow rules and regulations,
then a person would be safe and he would be able to return back to his spiritual position.
So some people, when they have accumulated objects of enjoyment,
they are not satisfied.
And even after I'm telling, when you follow even the Vedic rules and regulations for enjoyment,
if you do not follow, life is hellish.
Even if a person is following the rules and regulations, still there is dissatisfaction.
So then he leaves everything.
And then he thinks, oh, by leaving everything, I'll get some happiness.
So Krishna is telling, no, simply leaving things will not will not work.
Arjuna was willing to leave everything here.
I do not want to fight, he thought.
What is the use of this fighting?
It will create more problems.
So Krishna is telling my Sarvani Karmaanis, Sarva Karmaanimai.
You have to offer all your actions unto me.
My sannyasya, simply don't leave.
Leaving will not work.
You have to leave it for me in my service.
Adhyatma Chetasa, mine should be intent upon the form of Krishna.
Nirashir nirmamu bhutva, without any desire for profit.
Whole life you have been calculating your profit.
Attaining something in life did not satisfy me.
So let me leave now.
That is what people do.
You become billionaire, multi-billionaire, centi-billionaire, trillionaire.
Trillionaire nobody would have become.
So you become very rich and after you have become so rich, what do you do?
Then you start donating, contributing.
You think earning has not made me happy.
Now let me give it back.
Let me give it away all my wealth and that will bring me happiness.
But that also will not bring happiness.
Although there would be some peace of mind when you give up.
But unless you are always thinking about your peace of mind.
Oh, I will get satisfaction if I do this thing.
Always thinking about yourself, yourself, yourself.
So Krishna is telling give up this tendency.
Nirashir, become free from all the concepts of your gain.
Now in this life, human life, we have intelligence.
We have to adopt a consciousness whereby we can think of Krishna's game.
And thus offer our services, time, energy to Krishna.
Again, when we are offering our time and energy, we should not think it is mine.
And I offer it to Krishna.
Thus Bali Maharaj we saw in the last to last class when his entire kingdom was captured simply in two steps of Vamandeva.
There was no place to keep the third step.
So Vamandeva told you have broken your promise.
You told me three steps.
Now where is the scope for putting my third step?
So you told please put upon me because there are two things, property and proprietor.
So I am the proprietor.
I own this property, entire universe that already I have given to you.
Now I am different. I am proprietor.
Please keep your third step on my head.
So it seems that the wife of Bali Maharaj was even more advanced and very wise, very intelligent.
So wife comes and she offers prayers to Bali Maharaj.
Please leave my husband.
He is foolish person.
Even now he is thinking that this property, this universe belongs to him.
He is a proprietor.
And thus he's telling I am the proprietor.
It belongs to me.
You take me also.
So that is why there are very beautiful prayers.
Very beautiful prayers.
Mind, body, manasa means our mind.
Sometimes our body can be engaged in Krishna service, but mind is roaming elsewhere.
So deha, my body and my mind, both I offer to you.
And then geha, geha means my house, property, whatever is there with me.
Whatever you consider it is mine.
I don't consider.
But whatever is considered mine, I offer everything in your service.
So when we are offering service to Krishna, it should not be in the mood.
I am having something I am giving.
No, everything belongs to Krishna.
I am offering back to Krishna.
In this way, you fight without any lethargy.
There should be service, just like for serving our senses or senses of some people.
We are working day in and day out with great rigor.
With that same rigor and vigor, we should work vigorously in the service of Krishna.
This is called Karma Yoga.
So working with the same rigor, with the same skills, with the same strength,
not thinking it belongs to me, neither the skills or the property or the energy or my mind or body.
And without any calculation for my property, if I do this, what will I gain?
And always thinking of Krishna within the heart,
doing activities for Krishna, offering the results of activities to Krishna.
This is called Karma Yoga.
This is the purpose of Bhagavad Gita.
So now let us see what Krishna is going to tell Arjuna further.
Text number 31.
What does it mean?
One who executes his duties according to my injunctions,
as Krishna has given the injunctions,
and who follows this teaching faithfully without envy,
becomes free from the bondage of rotive actions.
I'll explain this. Let us see the verses first.
But those who, out of envy, disregard these teachings and do not practice them regularly,
are to be considered bereft of all knowledge,
befooled and doomed to ignorance and bondage.
So Krishna is telling some people they become envious.
What is envy?
Envy means jealousy.
I cannot see the benefit of other person.
So in this material world, all the living entities who have material bodies within the universe,
they are all harboring envy for God.
So they do not understand the simple concept,
I can make buildings, I can make cities, I can make islands.
Why some person cannot create planets?
Even yogis can create planets.
So even creating planets is no difficult thing for a human being.
A human being, if he is very powerful, he can create planets.
Flying cities, Karda Muni created in the history,
a flying city for his wife,
and they were traveling across the universe in that flying city.
So yogis can create flying cities, they can create planets also.
So why somebody cannot create all the planets in the universe?
What is the difficulty?
We cannot create a greed, we are very less powerful.
But why we are bringing God, supreme creator to our level?
Very simple.
If I cannot do it, then nobody can do it.
So this is not logic, this is illogical.
So why this is called envy?
So Sheila Prabhupada gives a very nice example.
What is envy?
So two friends were talking about third friend.
That in olden times, the best job that a person can get was that of judge,
high court judge, the top most position in British era.
And Indians were offered that was the top most position that Indians could hold at that time.
So these friends were discussing, you know that friend,
he has become a judge, a high court judge.
So he, the first friend told, really?
Oh, how can he become judge?
No, no, I saw him. He was there in the court.
He has become judge.
And so the other person, he's not willing to believe.
No, how can he become judge?
And maybe he would be roaming around in the court, but he's not judge.
No, no, I saw him sitting at the place where the judge sits.
He was sitting there.
So then he told, oh, maybe he might be sitting on that place,
but I'm sure he would not be getting the salary of judge.
So in this way, people have envy.
So somebody has got into some high position.
They want to find out faults.
They think, oh, by cheating, he has reached there.
He was not qualified. He is there.
Or he's having some other disqualifications.
Some of people are not willing to accept superiority of another person.
And even within family, this envy is seen.
Brother is doing better than another.
His cousins or even real brothers, there is envy in the heart.
Sisters, there is envy in the heart.
So this is the nature of the living entity.
And this envy originates originally because we are envious of God.
It is logical, but somehow because we are very envious, I want to become God here.
I want to become the greatest.
If another person's greatest exists already, what is scope of me being the greatest?
So I don't want to accept.
I don't want to follow any rules and regulations.
So out of envy, some people disregard the teachings and do not practice them regularly.
When Krishna is telling you, please surrender unto me.
You love me. You always think of me.
You always chant my names.
We become envious when Krishna tells do not worship any anybody else.
We become envious.
But when the boyfriend or the girlfriend would tell the same thing, do not take anybody else's name.
Give all your money to me.
Give all your time to me.
Then we would gladly be doing that.
So for an ordinary mortal, we are gladly doing the same thing, which we are not willing to do for God.
We tell why why Krishna only we will go everywhere.
We will do everything.
No, but when a person whom we are attached, he or she demands something.
We are very much willing to do that because there is some attachment and here there is no attachment.
There is envy for God.
So sometimes because of envy, I don't want to regulate myself according to some book, according to somebody's instructions.
I want to have my own life.
But when your same spouse or your friend, you are in relationship, they tell then we are willing to agree more than agree.
Why 20 hours?
I'll give you 40 hours because there is attachment over there.
So here Krishna is simply teaching us.
Develop your attachment for me.
There is nothing difficult to be understood.
Same Krishna is telling.
And when you have attachment for me, then you will be very, very much satisfied.
So out of envy, those who disregard the teachings, Krishna is our best well-wisher and the creator and do not practice them regularly.
Sometimes we practice.
Sometimes we don't practice are to be considered a bereft of all knowledge because they don't have common sense.
I'm doing for one person, not doing for the Supreme person.
They are considered bereft of all knowledge, be fooled and doomed to ignorance and bondage.
Now, why this why a person is not able to have this common sense that anyway, I am serving.
I'm serving just like when we are doing any kind of job, we switch jobs.
Why? When we find a better employer, somebody is giving more money.
So the common sense should be which is the best employer.
So that is why people try to aspire to go to the best college.
They want to have the best company.
So in this way, using common sense, we should see who is the best person whom I can serve.
Why people want to switch to government job?
Because private job, they feel discomfort bondage, isn't it?
So much morning also boss will call evening.
He will call and so much extra hours I have to put in government job.
No bondage is there.
I'm a little bondage whatever, but there is freedom.
So government is a big establishment and job is very, very stable.
They will not throw you out.
So like this, a person calculates who is best employer.
So similarly, we should not stop at this point.
We should keep on pondering even in government job.
Where is the question of happiness?
Whom can I serve that there is no problem in life in this way?
An intelligent person comes to the understanding.
Bahu Nam Janmana Manthi after many, many births that I should serve God.
That is very nice.
And here in this world, if you engage in any service, there is bondage.
But we have to engage in seva because without seva we cannot do anything.
We'll not get salary.
We'll not get money.
We cannot enjoy life.
So we like that.
So somehow we tolerate the bondage.
But however, Krishna service is so nice.
You get everything, whatever you want, the enjoyment, and there is no bondage.
Also, there is complete freedom in the service of Krishna.
The way you want to serve Krishna, that way Krishna is willing to reciprocate.
Just see it is so nice service.
If you approach any company, sir, I want to work as manager in this position.
This department.
OK, given if they tell you, oh, such a nice company.
And Krishna is telling that he has in that position.
In whichever position, whichever form, whenever, however you want to serve me, I reciprocate.
I'm willing to take it.
So it's in that form only.
So just see it is so nice.
Simply we have to become service oriented, develop some knowledge of God.
But why we are not able to have this knowledge?
So Krishna tells this thing.
We have got knowledge, suppose.
But even after knowledge, we are not able to follow the spiritual path very, very smoothly.
Why?
Krishna tells even a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature.
For everyone follows his nature.
What can repression accomplish?
So sometimes you may get knowledge and many people would speak big, big knowledge.
But when it comes to practical application in life, they are falling for the same habits.
Not able to change their habits, not able to change their nature.
Same anger, same greed, same lust, same behavior.
They are falling for the same habits, not able to change their habits, not able to change their nature.
Same anger, same greed, same behavior.
Same desire, same sense objects.
We are getting entangled.
So even the knowledge has come.
This thing is good.
This thing is bad.
But even knowledge doesn't help a person mundane knowledge to change one's behavior.
So Arjuna here, he was willing to change not to fight.
So Krishna told, please do not do this foolishness because your nature is that of a Kshatriya.
A Kshatriya body is designed to fight.
So now you are not willing to fight.
You are telling I will beg.
I live like a Brahmana nonviolence.
I want to follow.
But then you will not be able to follow this nonviolent nature for long.
You will be simply repressing your desires.
Repression doesn't help for long.
So that is why people tell, Prabhu, you are telling rules and regulations we have to follow.
And we don't have to fall for other addictions.
But then you have to follow.
But then people tell you should not suppress your desires that will create disaster later.
Yes.
So suppression Krishna is also telling suppression or repression doesn't accomplish anything.
The desires will burst out.
So that is why that is not the process.
So what is the process that Krishna tells here?
Attraction and repulsion for sense objects are filled by embodied beings.
But one should not fall under the control of the senses and sense objects because they are stumbling blocks on the path of self-realization.
So why the self-realization God consciousness person is not able to have?
Because attraction and repulsion for sense objects exists.
And thus we are not able to change our nature.
So helplessly we get carried away by the sense objects.
So attraction is also bad and repulsion is also bad.
Some people start hating.
No, hating is also not recommended.
Hating or attraction?
In both cases, we are getting influenced by the sense object.
So some sadhus, they hate money.
Maya, Maya. So there is one big organization.
So practically you have to have money.
Then only you can run the things around.
You can preach.
You can have establishment.
So how to have money now?
Money is Maya also they tell.
They hate touching.
So they keep one another person with them.
And if they have to go for donations, then this person will collect, will touch money they would not touch at all.
So this is not what Krishna recommends here.
We should neither hate nor we should get attracted.
So Prabhupada told, as Lord Krishna mentions here, we are neither enjoyers.
We are neither renunciants.
We are simply servants of Krishna.
We neither have strong attachment for anything.
No, I want money, money, money.
Let me have a lot of money.
We neither have repulsion for money.
Let me not have any money.
I don't want.
I will live under a tree.
No, for Krishna service as much money Krishna sends, we will use it.
We can touch it.
We can collect it with both hands and legs and whatever.
And if Krishna doesn't allow a penny, then devotee is willing to live under a tree also in the service of Krishna.
So this should be the mood of a devotee.
So when Krishna is telling Arjuna, you fight, Arjuna should be willing to fight and kill all the people on the other side.
And if Krishna tells do not fight, then even if your life is at risk, do not fight.
But however, for embodied being, it is very difficult.
Few things we don't like and few things we like.
Some people we love, another set of people we hate.
And thus these things, they constantly force us away from the self-realization.
So what is the solution?
Knowledge is not going to help this attraction repulsion a person will feel.
And this is stumbling block on the path of self-realization.
So how do we solve it?
So that is why Krishna tells here very nicely.
So please note all of you.
It is far better to discharge one's prescribed duties, even though they may be faulty than another's duties.
Destruction in the course of performing one's own duty is better than engaging in another's duty for to follow another's path is dangerous.
So it is this attraction or repulsion for the sense objects in this world,
which binds the living entity into unlimited desires and frustration resulting from not attainment of the sense objects
or dissatisfaction even after the sense object is attained.
I have some desires. I desire something badly.
So I'm in great discomfort. I want to have it. There is a lot of anxiety.
That is why when people give interviews, they become very anxious. I may not lose it.
And sometimes people become depressed or day zero placement is over.
I did not get placed and he's feeling depressed. Why should I live?
Day zero is over. There is no job for me.
I lost all the 20 lakhs plus jobs in my college. What should I do now?
Oh, I'm 20 years old. I'm not a billionaire.
And the boy in MIT committed suicide.
So so much anxious.
And even if you have it, the so-called happiness or euphoria doesn't last for long.
So that's it is a vicious cycle. I'm attracted towards sense object also.
And if I don't get I'm dissatisfied, I get again, there is no satisfaction.
So basically all this is originating because in hard, there are unlimited desires.
And we are simply piling up those desires.
So Krishna has become tired. He has not become tired.
We would have become tired by listening.
But just see how many times Christian has told in the Bhagavad Gita here again,
attraction and repulsion for sense objects.
They are stumbling blocks on the path of self-realization and our education system,
our marketing, everything are bringing.
It tells us, please have more and more sense objects and then show to your neighbor.
Also, if he's having some sanity, he should also become insane.
He should also start chasing sense objects like you are chasing in this way,
create a society, whole population of insane people who are in anxiety.
When will I have my sense object? When will I have my good rank?
When will I have good property? When will I have I have a good spouse to show off to others
and then good company to show off to others and all these things.
But then in my heart, even if I have attended, I know I'm dissatisfied by all those things.
So that is why Krishna is first of all telling, please understand this is wrong.
This disease you have got in your heart because you are intensely looking for some satisfaction,
which you think I will get by attaining these things.
No. How you will get that satisfaction?
It is not by getting attracted towards some sense object, but getting attracted towards me.
That is why when a person gets attracted towards Krishna,
no sense objects can pull a person and then his nature gets changed completely.
So any other process you follow, great Gnani, Vishwamitra also.
How much Tapasya he did? 60,000 years, then he got perfection.
So he was standing alone in the jungle and for a long time he was doing Tapasya.
After many thousands of years also, he fell down.
One Apsara came, heavenly girl, and then distracted and lost.
Finished. But there are advanced devotees like we see example of Narad Muni.
Narad Muni was very young and he got Hiranyakasapu's wife Kayadu.
He was staying in the heart of Narad Muni and Narad Muni gave proper protection to Kayadu and without any disturbance.
So he's violating the laws of scriptures.
A young man should not have associated with a young woman, a sanyasi.
But all these great personalities, they are transcendental Paramhansas.
They don't fall under the laws of nature. Their body is completely spiritual.
So thus they need not follow any rules and regulations.
So devotees like Narad Muni, like Haridas Thakur and Haridas Thakur also.
He was talking to a prostitute in the dead of night in the jungle.
Why he was talking? He didn't know. He was knowing I will not get affected.
So these stages are not to be metered by ordinary Sadhaka's like us.
But we understand this is a stage of spiritual life which only devotees can acquire.
And when a person is there situated on that stage, then entire nature is changed of material body.
In this material body, there is hunger, there is thirst, there is attraction for certain sense objects.
A monkey would be attracted towards fruits. A pig would be attracted towards tool.
We are attracted towards certain things. So helplessly a person would be attracted.
This cannot be changed unless the nature of the body changes.
So that is why Krishna tells when a person spiritualizes his body, the body no longer behaves materially.
And when a person is completely absorbed in Krishna, then there is no more all these things, disturbances.
So to attain this stage, what is required is simply one has to execute swadharma.
Swadharma means one has to prescribe duties very very nicely.
And even though there could be some fault in one's duties, just like a businessman, there is fault in his duties.
What is the fault? Businessman has to lie. Without lying there is no business.
Some people may ask him that what is the cost price?
I am not gaining any margin. He has to tell like that.
Otherwise people will take advantage of him. Nobody would put faith.
So that is why it is understood in the scripture that businessman has to tell lie.
He should not be dishonest and cheat others, but this lie is allowed. Some lie.
Similarly, there is also fault in Kshatriya's duty.
What is fault in Kshatriya's duty?
If you have to kill enemy on the battlefield, you have to practice killing.
Otherwise a person's hand would shake. Killing other person is not so easy.
So that is why he kills animals in the jungle, ferocious animals.
So animal killing, killing of any kind is not good.
But he has to do that practice so that he can kill enemies when required.
So thus although killing is not good, it is paap, sinful activity.
But still a Kshatriya is supposed to do his duties very nicely.
So in this way there could be some faults in the duties.
However, when the results of the activities are offered to Krishna,
and a person as we saw in the previous shlokas takes food which is offered to Krishna,
a person gets freed from these faults which are part and parcel of one's duties.
But one should never leave his duties.
So this is one duty, material duty.
And another duty is spiritual duty.
So both spiritual duty would be given by spiritual master.
Now you may ask, Prabhu, I am Kshatriya, I am Vaishya, I am Shudra.
Which duty should I do, material duty?
So in Kalyuga, because everyone is doing job and they are taking money
and not following rules and regulations, so entire civilization is on the Shudra level.
So thus, whatever job suits us, our mind and body, we should do it honestly
and offer the results to Krishna
and follow the rules and regulations of spiritual life.
This is the prescribed duty.
Now if we simply follow our prescribed and for our,
apart from the honest pursual of our job,
another thing is following the spiritual duties.
That is the sadhana program that spiritual master tells.
Like we have some program, you have to chant these many rounds,
you have to follow, you have to hear the lectures,
you have to read these many minutes every day,
you have to eat this kind of food stuff.
So this is called sadhana.
So simply when a person follows these prescribed duties very very nicely,
do not jump into other duties.
Spiritual master has told us to do this thing, then we have to follow that.
Spiritual master may tell somebody, you simply do the painting work,
you simply now focus on painting, that will make your life successful.
Spiritual master contains about somebody,
of course basic things would remain same, you have to chant and do everything.
Rest of the day what we are supposed to do,
sometimes Haridas Thakur, he was given responsibility of chanting,
you don't do anything else.
24 hours without stoppage you keep on chanting.
Goswamis, they were given the task of writing books.
Raghunath Das Goswami in particular was told to show austerity to the people,
lead by the example.
So he excelled in austerities.
He was practically not eating at all, not sleeping at all,
and still having very good bodily strength.
So every Goswami or every devotee is given a certain duty by the spiritual master.
So a person should simply do those duties very very nicely,
which the spiritual master has given.
And in this way by following the duties,
a person's heart gets cleansed and the nature gets cleansed.
Changing the nature is not easy.
So if I think I simply get some knowledge I will be able to change the nature,
so no it is not easy.
And one more very important thing is there.
So we are following now this process also, we understood,
yes we have to follow the process.
But then many people follow the process,
some people advance very much, some people remain in the initial level,
some people remain in the intermediate level.
So what is that thing, that discriminating factor,
as is the title for today's session.
And this very nice word, we will keep on having it in the Bhagavad Gita.
Here also Krishna is telling.
What is that word?
So we have to follow, anutishthanti means very very regularly,
there should be no irregularity, tapasya.
Just like every day we go to office, we attend our duties,
every day we eat, similarly every day we have to follow these duties,
which are given by the spiritual master.
And very important word, which is used here is,
who follows this teaching,
five letter word, which discriminates,
this is only one word, which discriminates neophyte devotee,
from a very super advanced devotee and a perfect devotee.
And what is that word?
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, Hare Krishna.
I'm sorry, I've lost the meeting.
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare,
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna,
Krishna Hare Hare,
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Netare,
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna,
Yes, thank you.
So Krishna is telling this very word is important, one who follows this teaching faithfully.
So this faith is the important factor.
So all these teachings that we are following some people are there who are always doubtful
whether this is correct or not, will it lead to success or not.
So doubts are very important and intelligent person can have doubts.
But then if you are always doubtful then a person gets stuck.
So Krishna tells a doubtful person is happy neither in this world, in this life nor in
the next life and there is no advancement also for such a person.
So one has to follow these teachings faithfully.
So Chaitanya Charitamrita also very beautifully explains.
So this is from Madhya Leela, Chaitanya Charitamrita is the very top most literature it comes after
Srimad Bhagavatam.
So in the Madhya Leela that is the middle portion of Lord Chaitanya's past times, he
is giving wonderful instructions to Sanatana Goswami.
Thus he is explaining how to understand various devotees because it is important we have to
take association of the advanced devotee just like we have to take guidance from a very
expert professor if you want to have knowledge or an expert scientist.
So how to understand these different levels of devotees.
So it is mentioned according to one's FAITH faith, one is classified as a top most devotee,
an intermediate devotee or an inferior devotee.
There is only one factor nothing else, entire spiritual life is nothing but the building
of faith, only this thing.
So one spiritual level, spiritual advancement can be measured by this factor which is called
FAITH.
So let me read these wonderful instructions, these few shlokas and then we will discuss
further about it.
Shaasaryukta sunipuna dhrid shraddhayaara Uttamadhikari seitaraya sansara
Arjuna who is expert in logic, argument and the revealed scriptures and who has firm faith
in Krishna is classified as a top most devotee, he can deliver the whole world.
So oh Prabhu are you recommending blind faith, blindly I should follow whatever is written
in the Bhagavad Gita?
No, blind faith is never recommended.
That is why Arjuna is not blind, he is putting forth, he is asking questions and answers.
So here an advanced devotee is not having blind faith but the criteria which defines
an advanced devotee than other set of devotees is one who is expert in logic, he is very
very logical advanced devotee, argument, he can argue very expertly and the revealed scriptures,
he should be expert in the scriptures also.
Just like an expert advocate, he would be very very expert in the law books, Indian
Penal Code section, this section, this he would argue.
One who has firm faith in Krishna is classified as top most devotee, he can deliver the whole
world, entire world, he can liberate.
One who is expert in logic and in understanding the revealed scriptures and who always has
firm conviction and deep faith, pradashaddo adhikariyaha and having deep faith specifically
it is mentioned that is not blind is to be considered a top most devotee in devotional
service.
So he has very strong faith, firm faith but which is not blind, his faith is based upon
logic, argument and the knowledge of scriptures.
He is the top most devotee in devotional service.
One who is not very expert in argument and logic based on the revealed scriptures but
who has firm faith is considered a second class devotee, he also must be considered
most fortunate.
So some people may have very strong faith but such a devotee may not be very expert
in logic and argument.
So just like many of you are having strong faith in the process but somehow you are not
able to convince and then you ask prabhu how can I tell him he was speaking like this,
you are having strong faith, he cannot convince you but you also cannot convince him very
nicely.
So such a preacher, he is considered madhyam adhikari.
So thus please note very carefully, strong faith both are having madhyam adhikari, intermediate
devotee and an advanced devotee also.
What is the difference?
One devotee he is not very expert in, not expert in argument and logic based on the
revealed scriptures and advanced devotee is expert in logic and argument based on scriptures.
One who does not know scriptural argument very well but who has firm faith is called
intermediate or second class devotee.
Second stage is also very difficult to attain, he is also very fortunate.
And who is other devotee?
One whose faith is soft and pliable is called a near fight but by gradually following the
process he will rise to the platform of a first class devotee.
One whose faith is very soft, he has developed some faith, oh this is very nice, chanting
yes it is very logical what they are discussing.
Krishna speaks very logically in the Bhagavad Gita where his blind faith but then he meets
an atheist who is very strong in his arguments then his faith also may get shaken.
So one who is having such komal shraddha, he is soft and pliable, he is called a near
fight but it is not that always he will get stuck on that platform.
By gradually following the process he will rise to the platform of first class devotee.
Please note the word gradually following the process.
Process is very important, everywhere you have to follow a process, you have to get
a degree, you have to follow process, fill the application, submit the fees, attend these
many percentage of classes, write these many quizzes, internal evaluation, external evaluation,
these many research papers and then PhD or your degree like this you will get.
So there is some process which you have to follow everywhere for advancement.
You produce this much result then promotion.
So like this when a person follows the process there is a process, very very systematic process.
When a person follows that by chance it will not happen.
Some people are not very serious, they come and follow on their own then always near fight.
But those who are willing, Prabhu what should I do?
Please tell me what should I do next?
What is the process for advancement?
And if you follow that then there is advancement.
Even a near fight devotee everyone starts from that level.
So the difference is near fight devotee follows the process nicely, others do not follow nicely,
they get stuck on that platform.
He will rise to the platform, first class devotee, he also can become like Goswami's
like Haridas Thakur like Narad Muni, he can become if he follows the process very nicely.
One whose faith is not very strong, who is just beginning should be considered a near
fight devotee.
A devotee is considered superlative or superior according to his attachment and love.
In the 11th canto of Srimad Bhagavatam the following symptoms have been given.
Sarvabhuteshuyapashet bhagavad bhavam atmanaha bhutani bhagavati atmani esha bhagavatottamaha
Just see how beautiful it is.
So some people tell devotion means you tell us to become selfish, we should not love others,
What's his devotional life?
Devotee is very dry, not feeling any love, anything for other living entities.
So here it is told, a person advanced in devotional service sees within everything the soul of
souls, the supreme personality of Godhead Shri Krishna, consequently he always sees
the form of supreme personality of Godhead as the cause of all causes and he understands
that all things are situated in him.
So it is mentioned that an advanced devotee sees within everything the soul of all souls
Shri Krishna, the supreme personality.
He always sees the form of supreme personality of Godhead as the cause of all causes and
understands that all things are situated within him and thus he feels an intimate connection
with all the living entities.
So here it is mentioned, now we feel intimate connection with few people, we may feel intimate
connection with our spouse, that is most intimate relationship, a person can have intimate connection
with his children, with his parents maximum, that is also maximum.
If a person can do that he is expert in today's standards, people are leaving their parents
in old age homes and children also there is fight, the person who has made this township
he is fighting with his own daughter in the court, out in the open, just imagine what
is the use of becoming a millionaire when your daughter is fighting with you in the
court, in the public, what is this life, what is this advancement, how much frustration
would be, but at best a person can be intimate with this set of people, children, parents
and spouse.
But just imagine if this much love which you have for your few people around you, if you
can have for all living entities, how nice your life is, as soon as you see the person
you love, your heart becomes full of contentment and this thing and when you are seeing every
living entity and you are feeling intimate connection with every living entity, how nice
the life would be, so this is the life of a devotee, devotee's life is not dry but he
expands his intimate connection, it is no longer related to few people and that connection
is illusory based on dress, the same living entity comes in different dress, we may be
fighting with that living entity or beating that living entity, devotee's connection is
based on reality, everyone is part and parcel of Krishna, he sees Krishna within every living
entity and thus he feels immense love whenever he feels, when he sees any living entity,
this is the life of a devotee, so just see how nice the life is, when you are able to
love all the living entities very nicely.
So devotee's life is not selfish, it is not dry, it may appear like that because he does
not limit his circle to few living entities but expands it to all the living entities.
An intermediate second class devotee, he is not able to follow that platform, this
is Mahabhagavata platform, when he sees every living entity is better than me and what we
just discussed, second class devotee, he will not be able to have that consciousness, what
is his standard? An intermediate second class devotee shows love for the supreme personality
of Godhead, he is friendly to all the devotees, he is very merciful to neophytes who have
just begun their spiritual life and ignorant people who do not know it and he neglects
those who are envious of devotional service.
So a Mahabhagavata topmost devotee, he never neglects any living entity, he has love attraction
for all the living entities but an intermediate devotee, it is not possible to have that platform.
An intermediate devotee discriminates, he is advanced devotee, he is middle level devotee,
so with advanced devotees he renders service, he has friendly relationships and those who
have just begun their life, those who have just begun, he would guide them, show mercy
to them and those who are innocent people want to understand and some people who are
envious, what is his Bhagavad Gita? Krishna dancing with so many women, you want to follow
him? I don't want to follow. Envious, then a person is non-different, he doesn't bother
speaking to such people. So he is discriminatory in his behavior. And what is a neophyte devotee,
new devotee, what does he do? So this is also very interesting. A prakrit bhakta or materialistic
devotee does not purposefully study the Shastra and try to understand the actual standard
of pure devotional service.
So here it is being told we are at the neophyte level. A prakrit bhakta does not purposefully
study the Shastra and try to understand the actual standard of pure devotional service.
So we are having Bhagavad Gita discussion every day, we are assigning personal mentors
to everyone. Please study, personally ask as many questions you want, he would answer
you every day you can connect. Every day in the evening, even though they are very busy,
they can do their own sadhana very nicely. We have requested them, they are busy with
their jobs, with their family, with their business, but I requested them please sacrifice
little time for the service of others. Help them also understand the science. But still
if we don't take advantage of this, if you are not eager to study what is the high level
of spiritual life, devotional service, what is the process that we are supposed to follow,
in the logics and arguments given in the scriptures, then Lord Chaitanya who is Krishna himself
he is telling prakrita, our spiritual life has not even started. We are there on the
neophyte level only, at the beginning level only. So a prakrit bhakta or materialistic
devotee does not purposefully study the Shastra and try to understand the actual standard
of devotion service. All those who are not systematically studying the Shastra, prakrit.
He consequently does not show proper respect to advanced devotees. He may however follow
the regulative principles learnt from the spiritual master or from his family who worships
the deity. So he can follow rules and regulations very nicely. He will do sandhya vandan three
times, he will do achaman, he will take bath many many times, two three times in a day,
he will be very vegetarian and take prasadam, worship deity very nicely, do mangala aarti
every day, but then he is not willing to study the scriptures, then he is not able to give
respect to devotees. For him, I am there and Krishna is there, I don't need devotees. He
does not know how to behave with devotees. He is to be considered on material platform.
Although he is trying to advance in devotional service, such a person is bhakta praya neophyte
or bhakta baas, for he is little enlightened by Vaishnava philosophy.
So thus in order to go to higher level of devotional service, what is required is simply
association of advanced devotees and in their association trying to understand the scriptures.
So that is why all the scriptures have been written. It is a person should be very very
eager to read the scriptures. So the process is very simple. As Lord Krishna also has been telling
what we have to do is satam prasangat mam veer samvido bhavantirit karna rasayana katha
satam means devotees prasangat in their association mam veer samvido
we could be watching movie at this time we could have been doing many other things of interest
while we are discussing the subject matter of god which has not aroused much interest in the people
and even in us but now we find it interesting that is why we come day after day to hear it
because in devotee association the topics about god spiritual life become relishable otherwise
you cannot relish on your own our study of scriptures also will stop we will not advance
so study of scriptures and it has to be done in the association of devotees it is extremely
powerful process for advancement in spiritual life so this is the factor which will help us
to become advanced for this we have to follow the process so what is the process first of all
positive things we have to engage in chanting the names of krishna with a fixed commitment these
many rounds every day i will chant and read the scriptures every day in the association of
devotees and then automatically you will follow those things which have to be avoided meat eating
intoxication gambling illicit sex and when we follow this process our faith automatically
advances faith is the result of the modes of nature the energies which we have acquired
a blind person can never have faith that i am actually standing in front of a tall building
somebody may hear and he may be doubtful always because he's blind unless he gets eyes there is
no question of rising to the platform of strong faith blind person will always remain doubtful
a building could be there could not be there similarly unless a person comes to satvaguna
similarly unless a person comes to satvaguna he remains blind to the spiritual subject matter
unless his senses are controlled he will not be able to have clarity and always he would remain
doubtful thus pravopata simply follow this program process very strictly which i have given
and all your doubts will vanish and if you are not very strict and particular in following the
process doubts will always remain so we have to follow positive sadhana chanting reading association
and avoid these regulative we are to these four bad habits follow four principles meat eating
intoxication gambling illicit sex we have to avoid these pull us immediately to rajaguna and tamoguna
so when we practice the spiritual process and avoid those things which pull us down to lower
modes then intelligence is very clear person is able to see everything very very clearly
and then he is able to have a strong faith so thus i request all of you to please
follow this process very nicely and then the nature of body will change since objects will
stop affecting you so badly as we are getting affected now and we will feel tremendous progress
in spiritual life but sometime in the day we have to take out so i request all of you
40 minutes in a day please take it out out of 24 hours 40 minutes you can sleepless you can
one and a half hours we spend in our meals every day finish your meals little early few minutes
from there spend little less time on whatsapp or some other news and other things somehow you
please squeeze out 40 minutes in a day every day 8 20 to 9 o'clock we have this sadhana it should
be done in the morning so we will do sometimes for serious people in the morning we would start
at least have it in the evening
