It's a very special day today, Independence Day.
And Bhavik is telling, Prabhu Ekadashi too.
Yes, definitely Ekadashi is most important.
But people generally now do not understand the significance of Ekadashi.
On every Ekadashi we are supposed to take leave from our work.
And safe time, our time goes in sleeping.
Six hours, seven hours, some people sleep up to eight hours also in a day or even more.
So one third of the day is gone in sleeping, so do not sleep.
So save that time and some two hours will go in taking three meals a day or in cooking etc.
So do not cook anything, do not eat anything.
So save time from cooking, save time from eating, save time from sleeping.
And engage entire day in chanting and hearing the names of God, the service of God.
So we are supposed to do this always, every day.
But it may not be possible for everyone.
We all have various material necessities and demands.
So that is why the regulation is at least twice in a month on Ekadashi.
Please dedicate your entire 24 hours in a typical Ekadashi.
Do not eat anything, do not drink anything.
So it is supposed to be Nirjala fasting, every Ekadashi.
So that every moment, those 24 hours, sunrise to sunrise, you can engage yourself in the service of Krishna.
Mainly chanting and hearing his names.
However, now our bodies are weak, so it is not recommended that we follow and we will not be able to follow most of us so strictly.
So we can all sleep.
But fasting as far as possible, we should try to do.
If it is possible to fast without water, that is recommended.
With water, that is okay.
And if you need to eat something, fruits and milks or whatever Sabudana non-grain item is available, that also we can take.
Depending upon the body, the bodies are very weak in Kalyuga.
So we have to see how far our bodies allow the fasting.
But other days, very well known, Independence Day, we all know.
But actually, if you think with little, giving little thought to it, that where is independence?
Are we really independent?
Have we become independent or had we become independent on this day some years ago?
So right from that time a child is born.
Yes, the way is he supposed to become by following all these things, rigorous Ekadashi fasting,
not eating, not drinking, not sleeping, taking some hardships.
Ultimately, what is the end result of all this?
So people do not understand. They think it is some ritual.
That is why we do and in a cultural background, all these things are going on.
No, everything has got a purpose.
Jeeveta muktipade sadaya bhag. Muktipade, getting liberation, is the ultimate aim of life.
Liberation from what? Liberation from the laws of nature.
The laws of nature are constantly harassing us.
Birth is still there. Birth is a very, very painful situation, although we do not remember.
That is why a child does not laugh when it comes out.
Child cries pitifully and sometimes child is unconscious when it takes birth.
Then doctors have to give it some slaps and then it comes into consciousness and starts crying.
It is very, very miserable condition.
By Krishna's mercy, the child is not conscious of its misery and remains in a dormant situation,
unconscious state for six months.
In the seventh month, the child in the womb, it gains consciousness.
And if he is a good soul, he or she is a good soul.
They pray to Krishna that Krishna, unfortunately, I've got myself locked up again in the laws of nature and I've got trapped.
So please take me out.
Now I promise I will I will completely engage in your devotional service.
But as soon as he is able to remember his past lives, also Bhagavatam describes.
But as soon as the child comes out, material energy, it takes over and the child loses its memory and it gets lost.
So birth misery, we have to suffer.
Death is a misery. Old age is a misery.
Diseases are definitely miserable.
So where is freedom?
Still, we are very, very tightly under the laws of nature.
However, the Vedas describe the processes as we discussed in the last class, the science of yajna.
If you do yajna, dana and tapaha, austerity.
So all this fasting, reducing the sleep, this is austerity, tapaha, chanting and hearing it is yajna.
And then, of course, we do charity as a part of yajna, dana.
So yajna, dana, tapaha, sthuchaiva.
So these three things should always be done.
So by following these things, which may appear to be little hard in the beginning,
a person is able to free himself from the clutches of the laws of nature.
However, today, in the name of so-called independence, this is called Maya.
Maya means something which is not.
We are actually becoming more and more dependent.
The child is made dependent from the very birth.
Child, please take this toy.
And so child was not demanding the toy, but you have given child a toy to play with.
Now that you have given him a toy, he has become dependent upon the toy.
If the toy is not there, he will cry.
And then similarly, more allurements.
Nowadays, the children are being pampered like anything.
Whatever they want, immediately parents think, oh, we were born in middle class thing.
Let my child not suffer from any of the any of the desires which I could not fulfill in my childhood.
And they think that will make child happy.
But that makes child very, very miserable.
And the children develop an artificial notion of life.
This research was done in the I think some Purdue, some other university.
So in the Western civilization, children become depressed, which was unheard of a few years ago.
Why this is happening?
Because they live in artificial situation of life.
Whatever the demand, the parents think, let me fulfill it.
And immediately the demand gets fulfilled.
And when they grow up, they realize the world is not like that.
What they are asking for that is not getting fulfilled.
But earlier it was immediately getting fulfilled, whatever they wanted for.
So now they cannot tolerate it.
Immediately they become very much disturbed.
So that is why it is very, very important to say no to child, the Westerners say.
But beyond that, they don't have further knowledge.
So we are making the children actually dependent.
Dependent on toy, dependent on chocolates, dependent on various things.
Then he grows up.
Then he's dependent upon the school exams.
If he performs nice in the school exams, then he's happy.
If he's not able to perform nicely, then he's in stress.
Earlier there was only one exam, the annual exam.
Then there came quarterly exams, unit tests.
Now there is Monday, Tuesday, weekly test.
Every week he has to perform.
So this is called independence or dependence.
Every week if he's not able to perform, he'll become sad.
So just to become happy or in order to remain sane or little peaceful,
he has to surrender his free will to the weekly tests.
If he's not able to perform every Monday, then he'll become stressful.
So just see, this is dependence or independence.
So he has become more dependent.
Then after that, he wants toy, he wants computer game.
He wants so many dresses.
He will compare.
Oh, my friend is having, he's wearing new shirts every day.
Why should I repeat?
I also want new shirts for me.
Oh, he has got this mobile phone.
I also want this, another mobile phone.
In this way he has become dependent.
And then he grows up.
Then more dependence.
Our so-called super fantastic Hollywood and Bollywood movies we have.
Then the girl wants a boyfriend.
The boy wants a girlfriend.
And they have become even more dependent.
Now if they do not have boyfriend or girlfriend, they are in stress.
So in this way, simply increasing.
Now you want movies.
If you do not watch movie every day or every other day, you come under stress.
Then you want to see cricket match also.
You do not do that.
You come under stress.
Then you want to order food online.
Also, you have to eat out.
Also, you do not do you come under stress.
So all these things were not existing before.
If you do not hear the new song, which is being released, you come under stress.
You have become dependent upon new downloads.
You have become dependent upon checking notification.
When notification comes in the phone, we do not see.
We come under stress.
So what is happening?
Let me see.
So we are becoming more and more dependent at every level, every step.
More and more greed.
Then we pick up a job.
And in job, I want promotion.
If I do not get promotion, no good appraisal.
Then I come under stress.
So I am becoming more dependent.
I am dependent upon the quarterly results.
This quarter performance was not nice.
I become diabetic after a couple of quarters.
So we are becoming more and more dependent.
So in this way, we are simply an earlier person was dependent upon one partner.
Now I want more than one partners to enjoy more dependence.
Earlier, one partner could satisfy me.
Now there is no limit to it.
Whole life keep on searching like a dog.
Next partner, next partner, next partner.
So thus we can see how horrible the situation is.
We are becoming simply more and more dependent.
One new sense object comes into picture.
And then we get hooked onto it, addicted to it.
Yes, I want this also in my life.
Nobody in India was drinking tea.
And the Britishers were very fond of intoxicants and drinking tea is very normal thing for them.
Now it is normal for everyone.
So nobody was there to take it.
So how to make business here?
They started introducing tea free of cost in places of public gathering.
And then it was distributed free of cost.
People took it.
If you asked your grandfather somebody, they would tell earlier tea was not considered a very good thing.
And then people started keeping it for the guests.
But at house people would not take it.
But now it is pretty normal.
So they started giving it free of cost.
And once you take it, you become addicted to it.
And then they started selling it.
Now tea is a huge business.
Every person is taking in the country.
They have got addicted.
So we were living without this intoxicant.
But now we want it every day.
So this is called dependence.
So why do we celebrate Independence Day?
Because it is a common sense thing.
A person who is dependent or animal who is dependent,
Peter, humanity and animal equality.
So many organizations are there which are working to set animals free.
Why you want to make animal free?
I'm feeding the animal.
No, I'm taking care of animal.
No, no, just set the animal free.
They tell freedom is greatest happiness.
Even for animals who are very low in consciousness,
then what to speak of human beings.
We want unlimited freedom.
But this is called Maya in the name of so-called expanding the freedom.
Our freedom is getting curtailed.
We are becoming more and more dependent, dependent, dependent upon name,
dependent upon fame, dependent upon position, dependent upon money,
dependent upon people.
So that is why in Vedic culture,
the first teaching is Brahmacharya.
You please go to Gurukul and very nicely educate yourself
how to live with bare minimum necessities of life.
Even the son of a king would serve guru like a menial servant.
He would sleep on the floor without any bedding.
And he will wear some either the deer skin or some bark of a tree,
matted hairs he would keep or he would be clean shaven.
In this way, Brahmacharya will have a very simple life.
He will live by begging, begging alms.
And then again alms he will give to his teacher.
He would not keep for himself.
And he's completely practicing freedom.
This is called and completely away from all sense objects.
So this is the education.
This education makes people free.
But today's education, Prabhupada said, is a doggish education system.
It is creating more dogs.
You see the dogs, they howl, cry very greatly at night.
Why? Because they are very, very hungry.
Anytime you show one chapati to dog, immediately it would jump to take it.
So street dogs, their situation is very bad.
Any person would beat him, would throw stone upon.
And always he is hungry.
But a pet dog, he is very happy.
He will travel in the same car.
He will live in the same house, maybe on the same bed as that of master.
Similarly, our education system is unless I get a master who can give me a
he can change me to my computer in my table.
Ten hours I'll be chained to my system.
I'll work for him like a dog.
And I'll get some some biscuits from him in the form of salary.
If I don't get such a master who can employ me, my situation is like that of street dog.
This is today's education system.
So although these words may be harsh, but these words are spoken by
the self-realized souls by Shukadeva Goswami and by Krishna himself.
So dog, hawk, camel and ass, these examples are given.
So those people who are not devotees of Krishna, their situation is like that of
dog, hawk, swa, vid, vara, ushtra, kharae.
Swa means dog.
Vid, vara means stool eating pig.
Ushtra means camel and khara means ass.
So Bhagavatam mentions.
It is not that fanatically somebody is criticizing, no.
Krishna himself criticizes.
And Shukadeva Goswami, the most exalted, liberated personality,
who spoke Bhagavatam to Parishchit Maharaj,
he is repeating the same instructions.
So Shwa, I explained how people are becoming, following the footsteps of dogs
and how, why the Bhagavatam compares us with camel, with hawk.
I will discuss in some other class.
So now our education system, unless you get a job, entire education is waste.
You have to become dependent upon somebody.
Yes sir, 10 hours, 12 hours of my day, even on weekends sometimes.
More education means you are a better dog.
On weekend also the boss will not leave you.
You are chained.
So how there can be any help and people are crying,
Oh Prabhu, there is so much stress, so much anxiety.
So where is freedom sir?
We are simply getting attached to more and more sense objects.
And one of them is missing, then we are disturbed, completely dependent.
So real education means how a person can minimize things.
In this way he can increase his happiness.
Thus a Brahmana, the most learned person in the society,
he will never go for any earning.
He will never earn anything in life.
Just maintain himself with bare minimum necessities.
This is the training he gives himself.
And what is the qualification of a Brahmana?
Brahma janateti brahmana.
Brahma bhuta prasannatma.
He is always prasannatma, always happy.
Anybody who is crying, he cannot be called a Brahmana.
He is called Kripaana, miser.
Who does not know how to utilize a set of this human form of life
in order to completely get rid of freedom from all the laws of nature.
Miser, Kripaana.
So Brahmana is always very very happy.
Brahmana is not by caste, but who is always happy in all the conditions.
He is called Brahmana.
So actually all the various kind of dependencies that we have generated,
it arises only from the two things that we always discuss in our classes.
Which are those two things?
That is tada rajas tamo bhava, rajo guna and tamo guna.
There are some energies within the body which make us dependent.
That is called rajas and tamas.
Mode of passion and mode of ignorance.
Child is ignorant.
So child has to become, child has to remain dependent upon the parents.
He has to hold the finger of his father.
Father tells eat this, do not eat this.
Take this medicine, do not take this, avoid this.
He has to follow because he is ignorant.
Person who is blind, he is in ignorance.
So traffic can be there in front of me or some pothole can be there.
I may not fall down, may not meet with an accident.
So he has to become dependent upon somebody.
So ignorance makes us dependent.
And passion also makes us dependent.
I want so much of sense enjoyment in life.
So this passion and ignorance, it gives rise to lust and greed in the body.
And all the conditioning and troubles of life are only because of these two things.
Lust and greed which are never satisfied.
And the person is getting kicked by the laws of nature day in and day out.
So how to become free?
The problem is very great, very complicated.
So I was speaking to one of our devotees.
And so recently went for a job abroad.
He's there now.
So I got a call from him and he was very, very enthusiastic for preaching.
So I thought, what has happened to him?
Suddenly he has become very enthusiastic.
And earlier we have to tell him to chant and this thing.
But now he himself is calling that probably I want to preach here and I've come to this new place.
So I discussed I was very happy that somebody has got this feeling to spread this knowledge to others.
But I asked him, please tell me when did you suddenly and how did you develop this preaching spirit?
You are so eager.
So you told probably something happened to me around six to eight months back.
So he explained he was traveling somewhere.
And then suddenly he realized he was having a bus travel and sleeper coaches are there.
So suddenly he realized that the roof is very close to me and he was getting little uneasy.
And then when he's sitting in the office again, he's thinking that things are closing down upon me and he's feeling very, very uncomfortable.
And then he realized maybe I'm having claustrophobia, the fear of close spaces.
But then this thing kept on growing.
And then he started living in hallucinatory state that I have got myself caught up in a lift.
What will happen to me now?
Even though there is no lift, he's not there in the lift, but he's thinking I'm in lift and I've got caught up.
I've got stuck.
Now the lift is not moving.
What will happen to me?
So like this, he's living in constant state of anxiety.
And then he told probably this thing is pretty common in his country and other European nations.
So this is called anxiety attack.
So and it is very, very common thing now these days.
So I was I had heard of this term, but I never spoke to a person before who is having such kind of attacks.
And he told it is such a painful situation.
He told you can cut my hand.
I can tolerate, but it was intolerable.
And a person commits suicide.
He cannot tolerate this kind of thing.
A person starts assuming that I am living in a state of deprivation.
Some loss has happened in my life.
And it constantly he's hallucinating like like that.
And anxiety is just building up and very, very painful situation mentally.
So it tells you please take my hand away, but somehow get me rid of this thing.
He approached the doctors.
Doctors can but give tranquilizers.
You keep on sleeping entire day.
And for years and years, people have to take such medicines without any solution.
So then he thought key, I am in into Krishna consciousness.
I know a bit of these things.
So I have to follow this process nicely.
Somehow you got inspiration from the heart.
There is because there is no solution.
Simply some tranquilizers and other sleeping pills by the doctors they recommend.
So then he started chanting.
He took to chanting very, very seriously there onwards.
Otherwise, we are not serious about our chanting, you know, without much attention.
And we chant, we finish our rounds.
And he told Prabhu within five to six days, I was able to completely finish my problem.
Completely finish.
Some 10 percent is there even now, he tells, but 10 percent is manageable and others also.
It is pretty normal thing.
Everyone has to that extent.
So in just five to six days of rigorous chanting, he got completely rid of that problem.
And it is many months now.
It is not returned.
He's very happy, very jubilant, very stable.
So he told, I realize now the potency of our process, just like air we take without any.
We don't we don't ever feel grateful that Krishna has given such nice air, such water.
But when air is not there, we would die immediately.
We cannot live for a few minutes.
So we take for granted.
But a person who is suffering to such people, we should ask, what is the relief that Hare Krishna Mahamantra gives?
So because he was suffering, he took to the process very, very nicely.
There was no other hope in life.
So with such dependence, he started chanting throughout day in and day out.
He was chanting and chanting continuously and then immediately he was able to come out of it.
The same thing. Arjuna was in similar situation.
His limbs were quivering, his throat was choking and he sat down in his chariot.
He was crying.
I cannot fight.
And just by hearing Bhagavad Gita, he got elevated to such a platform of spiritual bliss and happiness.
So our process is so very much powerful.
What to speak of peace of mind or getting rid of anxieties.
It takes you to a platform of spiritual ecstasy.
So that's even though the problems are great.
So all these problems, why people are having in life because of this lust and greed, anxiety, they are getting anxiety, panic attacks, so much anxiety.
They are built up in their life because of career, because of relations, because of so many in a varieties.
So what is the solution of this?
How to get these rajas and tamas out of our body?
So Shrimad Bhagavatam again, complete solution is there in the scriptures.
So it is told, very simple process.
Shunvatam svakata krishna punne shravana kirtanaha
Hridhiyanta staho hi abhadrani vidhunoti surit satam
Shunvatam. Shunvatam means simply keep on hearing.
Shruti svakata krishna punne shravana kirtanaha
So a person who is chanting and a person who is hearing both are benefited.
So simply by hearing, hearing, hearing what happens?
Hridhiyanta staho hi abhadrani vidhunoti surit satam
There are bad energies in our heart.
Bhadra means good, abhadra means bad, bad energies.
Satva guna is good energy. A person is happy by that.
He gets liberated and tamas and rajas means bad energies.
They torture a living entity like anything.
So simply by hearing the krishna katha and the name of krishna,
a person gets completely freed from this thing.
Nityam, nityam means always bhagavata sevaya.
When a person is continuously hearing bhagavatam, nityam.
That is why we tell please try to hear every day
and throughout the day as much as possible whenever there is time you hear
or try to remember what you have heard.
And it is not that Vedas don't recommend saptaha bhagavatam sevaya.
People are fond of bhagava saptaha.
One week if I hear that is nice for me.
No, nityam bhagavata sevaya.
Nityam means continuously, every day you have to hear.
So now we are having classes just on two days, Wednesday and Saturday.
So please other days is not chutti.
Other days we have to hear. Please hear Prabhupada's class.
Every day just like we eat, we have to hear bhagavatam.
Then a person's doubt are completely destroyed.
He becomes very fixed up in bhakti.
And rajas and tamas is completely eliminated from the heart.
Then a person becomes very very happy.
So our unhappiness is only because of rajas and tamas in the heart.
When there is happiness, when there is satpa guna in life,
then immediately a person becomes very happy.
For happiness we need not have any object or anything
or any person or any situation in our life.
We simply need to be out of rajas and tamas
and engage in ourselves in the loving service of God.
evamprasannumanasa.
Then when a person is happy,
bhagavat bhaktiyogata.
And then he engages himself in the service of God
in such a happy state of mind.
Then what happens?
Yeah, questions definitely I will answer.
Now you can please try to hear
because many questions will be answered in course of session.
I will still, if the questions are remaining,
you can ask after the session, chanting is over.
I will answer all the questions.
evamprasannumanasa.
bhagavat bhaktiyogata.
muktasangasya jayate.
bhagvat tatva vijnanam.
The science of God is known.
And as soon as a person understands the science of God,
the science of self,
then what happens?
muktasangasya jayate.
A person becomes completely free and independent
of all the laws of nature.
So thus a very nice sequential process is mentioned
in the second canto of Shrimad Bhagavatam.
So the process which we are doing,
it may appear like so many modules we hear,
so many certifications we do,
and so many tutorials we have online.
This is another ordinary subject.
No, it is extraordinary subject.
So any topic, understanding of Krishna,
any scripture when it is being discussed,
simply if we hear here here with great attention,
everything of the life,
we are completely liberated.
So to attain this platform,
it takes a very, very long time.
The yogis, they go to Himalayas just to accomplish this thing.
The jnani, they keep on reading Vedas
for thousands and thousands of years
because the age was one lakh years,
they could remember things for thousands of years.
But we forget what we have read yesterday or today morning.
So there is no scope for us to advance by this regular processes.
Neither we can go leave our families to go to Himalayas.
Body is not so strong.
Neither brain is so strong.
Neither brain is so sharp.
We can remember whatever we read at once.
So there is no hope for us in other process.
And these processes take a lot of time.
So Parishit Maharaj was suggested these processes,
but he was having just seven days at his disposal.
So how in seven days can we achieve perfection?
So they all started discussing.
The ruler of the world is going to die in seven days.
He wants to make his life perfect.
Which process is going to work?
So then everyone was confused.
Seven days, which no process can work in seven days.
It takes life after life,
many, many lives to make your spiritual life perfect.
And then Shukde Goswami entered the scene.
And then he gave, he told,
don't worry, dear Parishit,
Khatwanga Maharaj,
a very extraordinary ruler,
he got, he made his spiritual life perfect
by following this process of bhakti yoga
in one muhurta.
One muhurta lasts for 40-50 minutes.
So he perfected his life in one muhurta.
He has seven days time.
Do not worry.
Simply follow his footsteps.
So thus this process is very powerful,
especially for Kali yoga.
Parishit Maharaj simply heard.
He did nothing.
He did not go to jungle.
He did not go to Himalaya.
He did not do any extraordinary tapasya.
He did not try to read the Vedas.
He did not try to undergo any sort of meditation.
Nothing whatsoever.
The process for Kali yoga is described in the Vedas.
He simply heard Bhagavatam.
And simply by hearing Bhagavatam,
Parishit Maharaj was cursed
because he could not tolerate hunger
and thirst.
Thus he put a dead snake around the neck of a sage.
But Parishit Maharaj here,
simply by hearing Bhagavatam,
he came in samadhi.
He kept on sitting at the same place
without eating, without drinking, without sleeping.
He was completely undisturbed
now by any kind of hunger and thirst.
For seven days, continuously
in one posture, in one place,
he kept on sitting, hearing, hearing,
and in the middle he was asking some questions.
In this way he reached
the stage of samadhi.
So thus history tells
and the current situation is also
proof. This person is giving
proof. In five days I changed my life.
So now when I see in developed
nations people are suffering, I want to
preach, I want to give this simple gift to the
people. So thus
all of you please try to realize this very
important process. This is real
independence. Become dependent upon
Krishna. India was
able to preserve its independence.
US sent a big ship in the 1971
war. So India
practiced dependence upon Russia and Russia
sent another big ship. India was able to maintain
independence. So you have
to become dependent upon the greater
power in order to
become free from the lower powers.
So Krishna tells
my material energy
is very powerful to overcome.
But those who surrender unto me
they easily
cross beyond these forces of nature.
So we simply have to surrender to Krishna.
And this rajas and tamas, how he has
got built in
our body, it is because of the previous
karmas. So now we have to chant
in here very nicely. But
we don't have to commit further bad karmas.
One very great bad
karma which is related to today's topic
is
we will see the shloka now.
Very very important which most of the people
are unaware, especially those who are very new
in the sessions.
Yeah.
So you can see here
verse number 13
Lord Krishna is telling
very important shloka. Please read carefully.
We finished with this
shloka but could not discuss in detail.
So Lord Krishna mentions
the devotees of the Lord
santaha
are released from all kinds of
sins because they eat
food which is offered first for
sacrifice. Others
who prepare food for
personal sins enjoyment
verily eat only sin.
Eat only sin.
So it is very very important.
Two things are being mentioned.
Atma karanat means
for your self
sensual enjoyment.
If you prepare food for personal
sense enjoyment you are doing
great sinful
activity.
On the other hand if you prepare food
for yajna
then immediately
muchyanti sarva kilbishe
this kilbishe word you would have heard.
Shaktimaan was very famous.
Tamraj kilbishe was the
villain in that. So kilbishe
means all kinds of sinful activities.
He was sin personified.
So a person becomes free from
all the sinful activities because of
breaking the laws of nature in the
past life a person has got
rajas and tamas in his present life.
So unless we nullify those sinful
reactions and don't commit further since
we will not be able to eliminate
these energies from our heart
and thus keep on suffering.
So thus it is very very important
we do not know.
Anything that we have now as long as soul
thinks I am this body
it will be conditioned by the
changes of the body.
Anything has impact on three levels.
On gross body, on subtle body
and on spiritual level
also. Nowadays people are simply
concerned with the gross thing.
So a person had two options
to purchase limited currency.
Either you purchase fuel or you purchase
food. So he was traveling in
a car he simply spent all his money in
purchasing fuel for the car.
He did not take any food that is foolishness.
Similarly if he spent everything
for taking care of body
and don't bother about soul then that is
foolishness.
So food has got a tremendous impact
upon our spiritual
advancement also
or degradation for that matter
if wrong food is taken.
So that is why Ved Vyas tells
one of the descriptions of Kali Yuga is
food will be sold in the shops on
the streets. So we do not know
it is a very great science. I will
repeat again.
Right from the time the food is being cooked
the consciousness starts getting
invested into it. The person who is
cooking food his consciousness
is going into food.
Thus Srila Prabhupada gives
example, practical example
because he was in pre-independence era
also. So
the Britishers they hired
some Brahmanas in the police
department and in the police station
there was a kitchen
for them because many Brahmanas were there
in Jagannath Puri only or in some city
in Orissa. This is the case Prabhupada
So elaborate kitchen arrangement
and many stoves were arranged.
So why they were arranged?
Because all those Brahmanas
there is a tendency, there is a culture in
the Brahmana family they will cook
their own food because Brahmanas are
supposed to be in Satvaguna. Anyway they came
down from Satvaguna. Satvik person
never takes up a job
but they took up a job but anyway culture
was still there. So Satvik
person if he cooks food then
he can maintain his Satvaguna. If
a tamasic person cooks food for him he
will fall down in his consciousness. He will
also become tamasic. So this
science people do not know.
So cooking food is a very
very very important
activity.
Thus one person is supposed to take care
of the family. The man will go out
and woman anyway
needs protection. They can cook nicely in the
house and the women are trained very
nicely. The same spiritual
practices which a man can do outside
women can do inside.
Devahuti
the great mother of
Kapil Muni who is incarnation
of Krishna. She
also did the same practices. She also
followed Sankhya Yoga, the practices of Ashtanga
Yoga but by being at home
not going outside.
And the husband Kardamuni
he went out. He practiced in jungle.
Those things.
But staying at home and cooking is
very very important so that
the consciousness of entire family
is maintained very nicely.
Otherwise entire family would be
rajasic, tamasic, fight amongst themselves
fight with everyone and
then die and then degrade to
lower species of life.
So this science is not known to people.
Now nobody is at house. Some person
are maids with lower
consciousness. They can be but usually
they are not. So a person
with low consciousness he will come
and he will cook and then we will pick up the
consciousness of that person.
Thus there is so much more degradation in the
society. Lust and greed is
simply increasing uncontrollably
because there is no training of
consciousness and there is no cooking
of food in that consciousness.
So this thing is very very important.
Thus the devotees
we don't take food
except from a person who is chanting
16 rounds who is also initiated into
spiritual life because he can think
of Krishna while cooking the food and thus
we can also get Krishna consciousness
when we take food cooked by such a
person.
So this is a very very important science.
Now after
the food is being cooked as we discussed
why eating
food is considered sin? I explained in
the last class. There are
many sinful activities which we commit.
When you are taking
the vegetable out, the poor vegetable
is dying. So that is also
killing. So you will
be made to
suffer for the killing unless
that vegetable is used and is offering to
Krishna. Then the vegetable also the
soul which was there it advances in its life
if it is done for a proper
cause. Just like a person who
sacrifices his life for the nation, he is
given gallantry award and lot of money is given
to their families.
In a similar fashion if the body
is used of any soul, vegetable in
the service of Krishna, immediately
gets promoted to advanced form, human
form of life.
So otherwise it is a sinful activity
you have killed a living entity, then you
are grinding the wheat
or grains while
grinding again many many small living
entities they may die. When you are drinking
water, you are chewing, you are cleaning
again many many living entities would die.
But if all these things are done
in the service of Krishna,
yajna shishta, yajna means
food. You can either offer to the yajna
kunda directly. Those who have visited
his con temples, Hare Krishna temples, we
do Narasimha yajna.
In that we make special
sweet pongal for Narasimha Dev and
then we offer in the yajna kunda directly and
that becomes prasadam. And then
another drink we made panakkam for
Lord Narasimha Dev, that is offered to the
deity and then we take it. Both ways it is
prasadam.
So yajna shishta, either you offer it to yajna
or yajna vishnu, Lord Krishna
vishnu himself is called yajna, yajna purush.
You can offer directly to his deity.
Both ways it becomes yajna shishta
or prasadam. So yajna shishta,
shishta means remnant, remnant
of yajna or remnant of
Lord Vishnu, what he has
eaten. Santaha, saintly people
when they take that food, there is
a transformation of consciousness.
There is purification from all
these contaminations. Just like
ubi sanitizer. What is this?
Some rays are coming, but the thing has become
purified, sanitized. In a similar
fashion, we may not understand how it is
getting sanitized, but it is a verdict
of the Vedas. So when
you offer food to Krishna, immediately
it becomes sanitized.
And when a person takes that food,
he is able to
develop fine
tissues in the memory. Acharya
Baldev Vidyabhushan has given in Bhagavad Gita
purport commentary also, you can read
of this shloka. And the next and previous shloka
Bhagavad mentions very nicely.
So entire existence is
purified. We are what we eat.
You eat tamasic food, entire body is made up of
tamasic food, tamasic cells.
So our entire body is
purified. And
when body is purified,
our consciousness is also purified
because consciousness is linked to
body as long as we think
that I am the body.
And it acts
as a vaccine.
We have a lot of material contamination
always attacking us, lower
energies. So when a person takes
prasadam, a person will be able
to resist the forces of nature, resist
material affection, attraction and all these
things. So thus it is a very
very important thing.
And a person
automatically is able to control all the
senses very very easily. All
the senses, mind can be controlled simply
by tongue. Tongue has got
two functions, chanting and eating.
So if we chant always Krishna's name
and hear that offenselessly
and if we always
taste two functions, taste
Krishna prasadam, then all the
senses automatically will come under control.
The secret people do not know.
So that is why Prabhupada told simply
do these two things. What is
that? So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did not
discuss philosophy. Usually philosophy
is meant for very intelligent people.
So otherwise for ordinary
people, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu would do
Sankirtan every day.
Sankirtan means chanting and hearing the names
of God and Prasadam
distribution.
Distribute the food which is offered to Krishna.
You can offer very nice tasty dishes to Krishna
and you can distribute it simply
by this process.
Simply chanting, hearing and
taking prasadam.
Every person can liberate himself completely
from the laws of nature.
Simply by eating prasadam, a person
is free from the past sinful reactions
and in future he is not committing any sin.
And if the food is not offered
to Krishna, every step he is eating sin.
So nowadays
it is a common culture.
We want treats. We will go to parties.
So people do not know. If we eat food
in the house of a person who has earned
it by wrong means,
then immediately
we will share the sin of that
person. A person is taking lot of
bribe or he is working
doing a job or business which is not good.
Butchery or so many other things
are there now.
And most of the people are dishonest now.
If you go and eat at their place,
we will also suffer from the sinful reaction
of that person.
Remnant. If you take remnant of
somebody, it is very common now. Food sharing.
Little you eat, little I eat. We eat on the same
plate, especially in the college among the friends.
Or in
workplace also. We sit together in the lunch time.
Little you take from his tiffin, you take
from her tiffin and like that you share it.
So it is a very dangerous
activity. You are picking up the qualities
of other person. Yes, if the other person
is devotee, you should be very very eager.
You take from him, you make spiritual advancement.
But if the other person is having
lust and greed, you will also take up
the same things. He has committed some sins
in his life. You will also partake
of his sinful reaction.
So these are subtle sciences which are
related to the cooking, consuming
of food which is very very
important. So that is why we should be
very very careful.
It is not the Vedic culture to take
food anywhere and everywhere. Suppose
you have to go and take food somewhere
in urgency. Then you
pay for it.
When you pay for it, it becomes purified.
But it should be done in
exceptional circumstances.
Otherwise it is very
very important to regularly
simply by eating food which is offered to Krishna.
Krishna is telling here
You become free
from all the sins. And when a person is
free from the sins, he comes to
Satvaguna. He becomes very very happy.
Simply by honoring prasadam, you will
be able to maintain very nice, jolly, very
happy mood. Just take a commitment.
It is very simple process.
Whatever I am having in my house, let
me cook it with love offered to Krishna.
Ten minutes you keep in front of Krishna.
And then you take that thing. By the
simple process, you do yoga.
Simply connection with God is
established by taking food.
This is the verdict of Lord Krishna
in the third chapter of Bhagavad Gita.
So it is not anybody's
mental concoction. It has been the culture.
That is why the temples distribute
prasadam.
Simply eating prasadam liberates a person.
Very very powerful.
So Prabhupada told you cannot understand philosophy.
You are so dull. Simply eat
prasadam. Eating eating eating. One day
you will become completely spiritualized and
Krishna conscious. So it is a very very
powerful process.
So there is a great story also about how
prasadam changed the life of a person
that we will discuss in the next class.
So for now please try to implement this
very important thing in your
life. Just like with good faith
we take sanitizers, we wash our hands
and we clean various
things although we don't see any difference in our
hands. Similarly we have to depend
upon Krishna. We have to depend upon the great
spiritual scientists who
have recommended this process.
So along with chanting
and hearing all of you have been doing nicely
for past couple of weeks or months.
Now please add this one factor
prasadam in your life.
So if not possible to offer everything
start offering something. Some
water you can offer, milk you
can offer, fruits you can offer
and very soon try to offer everything.
Simply have a commitment.
Chant always and
only take prasadam and by this our
spiritual life would be.
