So in second chapter, Lord Krishna gives summary and in 18th chapter also Lord Krishna gives
summary and in between is the elaborate explanation of the Bhagavad Gita.
So Lord Krishna explained Karma Yoga, Lord Krishna explained Jnana Yoga and he gave
a glimpse of Bhakti Yoga. Lord Krishna explained in second chapter that I have so far explained
to you the Sankhya Yoga, Jnana Yoga. Now please hear from me Buddhi Yoga or Karma Yoga. So now
Arjuna appears to be getting confused. So now Arjuna is raising questions. What are the questions?
Let us see. Arjuna said, O Janardhan, O Keshav, why do you urge me to engage
in this ghastly warfare if you think that intelligence is better than fruity work?
My intelligence is bewildered by your equivocal instructions. Therefore,
please tell me decisively what is most beneficial for me.
So Arjuna is thinking Krishna is giving equivocal instructions. Equivocal means unclear. It appears
that Krishna is telling Arjuna do not engage in fruity activities and then Krishna is telling you
fight. So once Krishna is telling there is no need of doing any activity and then he tells you
engage in activity, engage in fighting. So Arjuna is getting confused. So likewise when we try to
understand spiritual life, there may appear equivocal instructions many times. But such
confusion is not because of the speaker. Such confusion is not because of the spiritual master.
The confusion is because of lack of our understanding. That is why like some people
tell that you tell us to put faith. And as soon as we tell people you should have faith,
people are afraid. No, no, why should I put faith? We should be rational. So sometimes people
misunderstand that if we are again, it appears to be another confusion that we are telling you
please put faith. In a sense, they take it to be blind faith and thus they are scared. No,
no, how can I do? Somebody can cheat me. So no, that kind of faith is not required. So that is
why we will see in fourth chapter, Lord Krishna is giving a very important instruction. What is
that instruction? There are various ways by which you can know truth, but the easiest way
of knowing truth is and the most perfect way of knowing truth is to know that truth, absolute
truth. So inquiry is allowed to the disciple and not allowed it is actually recommended.
So blind faith is not allowed in the Vedas because you have to understand
truth. A blind person, how can you know truth? We offer prayers to the spiritual master.
Oh, my eyes were blinded in ignorance and the spiritual master, you have kindly opened my eyes.
So it is about eliminating any sort of blindness that we have. So it is not blind faith, but it is
logical faith that we have to put. We have to use our intelligence and using our intelligence,
we have to put faith. A typical example, it is not very complex to understand. You need
authority always in every field. Any person who does not accept any authority, he is a foolish
man. If you are suffering from any disease, you have to go to a doctor. Can we find out the remedy,
the medicine ourselves? No, we cannot find. So does it mean that I should go to any person? There
is some panchurwala sitting down the road. We tell him I am having some symptoms. Please test me,
I am having COVID or not. Which problem I am having? No. So I am not supposed to have blind
faith upon anybody. Or somebody is working in white apron and I think, oh, he is a doctor. He
will cure me or she will cure me. No. So we have to use our intelligence. Just white apron doesn't
mean a doctor. So who is the right doctor? How to find? Then we do various testing. We ask various
people. Is he having degrees or not? Is he working in good hospital or not? Are people getting
benefit or not? In this way, when we are convinced, then we put our faith in the doctor. And that
faith is required because we do not know. Doctor can suggest anything. Doctor is prescribing some
pills and he is telling 100 mg, 250 mg, 500 mg you have to take in the morning before the meals
or after the meals. Like this, he will recommend. And we have to follow exactly what the doctor is
telling. And sometimes the doctor can, we allow him to take our heart out and play around with our
organs. And we are unconscious. We are completely surrender to doctor. Why? Because we are having
faith in the doctor. So the doctor can cheat. Also, the doctor can do and most of the doctors,
they cheat. Actually, 90% of doctors are corrupt. They will prescribe you for unnecessary, very
expensive medicines rather than generic versions. They will unnecessarily send you for very
expensive tests because they get commission from the pathology labs. But still we have to go to a
doctor because without doctor we cannot cure ourselves. So even though in a spiritual life
also we have many, many charlatans, many cheaters. Nevertheless, we have to find a person where we
can surrender because without the mercy and guidance of spiritual master, without surrendering
to spiritual master, having put faith in the spiritual master, there is no question of advancement.
Just like we put faith on the doctor, but use our intelligence to find a doctor in a similar way.
Prabhupada tells you, find out a guru where you can surrender yourself. And if you cannot surrender
yourself, then there is no need of accepting a guru. People accept guru as a fashion. Just like
if some nice fashion is trendy. So people like to put on that fashion. In a similar fashion,
if some guru is trendy, he is getting many likes and followers. People like to tell that,
oh he is my guru. But I don't care to accept the instructions of my guru. But he is my guru. Then
what is the use of guru? Guru means a person who gives you instructions. So that is why you find
out where is a person where you can surrender completely. And there you surrender. Pranipatena
is very, very important. So asking questions is recommended because there could be confusion on
the part of disciple. But asking questions before asking questions, pranipatena, surrender is
required. So use intelligence, use logic very, very nicely to find a person who is a spiritual
doctor. Because unless I accept the advice of doctor, I cannot cure my physical disease. What
to speak of curing spiritual disease and all the problems of life. So pranipatena, surrender is
required. Pranipatena and then once we surrender, then you ask questions. So in humility, when the
disciple is very, very meek and humble, very gentle, and he is asking questions, along with
one more very important factor. Pranipatena pariprasnena sevaya. Sevaya means service.
Doing service is also very, very important. So unless there is humility, surrender and there is
service. Srila Prabhupada explains, Lord Krishna also explains in Bhagavad Gita, asking questions
will be simply a waste of time. We will not be able to understand Bhagavad Gita or any Gita.
So if you want to understand, apart from hearing, asking questions, surrender and
seva are important. Pranipat, pariprasnena and sevaya. And when a person is engaged in seva,
then revelation is very, very fast. And actually all the revelations, this is called bhakti yoga,
the revelation happens by engaging in service of Krishna. A person simply engages in the service
of Krishna and then Krishna reveals all the knowledge within the heart. But sometimes people
become very eager. Oh yes, this Bhagavad Gita knowledge is so nice. Let me finish entire
Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavatam and then I'll become very advanced in spiritual life. No sir, not so easy.
Simply book reading without association of devotees, without engaging in seva, will not bear any fruit.
Unless a person engages in seva, the service, the knowledge does not fructify, is not revealed in
the heart. That is why Prabhupada told to read books one or two hours. If a person is very new,
then obviously he can read more and new devotees are recommended to read up to three hours in a day.
But otherwise one hours and two hours you read in a day and rest of the day engage yourself in
rigorous service. But how service has to be done under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master.
So simply the service which is assigned to us, just like we are working in a company,
simply if you do the task which is assigned to us, then we make nice advancement in the company.
We promote ourselves very fast. However, if you try to do very expertly the task assigned to
other person, we will not be able to advance. Rather we can be removed also. You do the task
which is assigned to you and simply if you do your task, don't do something extra, you get promoted
very nicely and easily in a similar fashion. We need to engage ourselves in the service of Krishna
strictly under the direction of a bona fide spiritual master and Prabhupada explains simply
if you do the task which is assigned to us very very nicely, then we make very fast advancement
in spiritual life. So this is called Bhakti Yoga. The task which is assigned to us simply focus on
that task, do it very very nicely, very expertly. So Prabhupada told you are engaged only one or two
hours in a day in reading Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavatam. But because you are engaging entire day in the
service of Krishna, you're working very hard for Krishna. So Prabhupada was explaining in a letter
I was reading today morning. So what was the name of devotee? The name I am Vishal, Vishaldas mostly.
So Prabhupada writes in a letter. So it looks like he was the top most book distributor,
the best book distributor. So Prabhupada was always about please distribute books,
distribute books. The greatest service which can be rendered to any living entity is giving
knowledge because the living entity is suffering only for lack of knowledge. A person does not
know how to have certain skills so he does not get job. That is why he studies nicely. He gets
some skills, he gets good job, he gets money and material problems he is trying to solve. So on any
level, mental level, physical level or spiritual level, the problems are because of ignorance. So
that is why if you want to help a living entity, the greatest benefit is giving knowledge. So this
devotee, he was doing very nicely book distribution and he came out as the best book distributor. So
Prabhupada always encouraged competition. Prabhupada without competition, there is no life,
there must be competition. Especially for Kalyuga, the source like us who cannot do anything but
compete. We are trained in such a way. However, for spiritual life, this competition is very good.
In material life, when we compete, then there is envy. Oh, this person is going ahead of me,
my heart burns. Even though I am doing nicely, but nobody should do better than me, then my heart
burns. And even if I have not done very nicely, somebody does less than me, I become very happy.
So this is material competition. However, in spiritual competition, when we see somebody is
not able to perform like me, we take compassion and try to elevate those souls, try to engage them
also in Krishna service so that they can advance like me or more than me. Spiritual master becomes
very happy if the disciples are able to advance even more than the spiritual master. And if
somebody sees, oh, this person is doing devotional service better than me, then heart does not burn.
Person becomes very happy to see, oh, Krishna is so merciful upon this devotee. Because without
Krishna's mercy, nobody can do any service. Krishna guides from the heart, Krishna gives strength,
everything. It is Krishna's mercy. So Krishna gives knowledge also, Krishna gives strength also,
and Krishna gives the skills also. So very nicely, when you read various instances are then Bhagavatam,
when Bhima was fighting with Jarasandh. So both were equally powerful, strength of 10,000 elephants,
Jarasandh and Bhima. And they are fighting day after day for 28 days, kept on fighting. Finally,
Bhima considered Krishna, I cannot defeat this person, not possible. So Krishna told, don't worry.
And then Krishna gave hint to Bhima. So because Jarasandh, the names come from the demoness,
Jara. So there was a witch. And this person, Jarasandh, when he was born, he was born in two
pieces, two halves. And Jara, by her magic, she combined both the pieces, two parts of the body.
And then Jarasandh came back into life. So it was very difficult to kill him in ordinary way,
but because he was combined by this process. So Lord Krishna, he gave hint, he gave Gyan,
knowledge to Bhima. Bhima, how you can kill Jarasandh. So then he took a straw and tarry
apart the straw indicated in this way, you have to tear apart Jarasandh. Then only it is possible
to kill him. And but how he can tear him apart, he has to put him on the ground. And then
he's also equally powerful. Why would he allow that? So Lord Krishna gave special strength to
Bhima also. So Lord Krishna gave instruction to Bhima. Lord Krishna gave strength also to Bhima.
This way Bhima was able to defeat Jarasandh. So in this way, spiritual life is tricky also,
spiritual life is easy also. Tricky because it is very very difficult to understand
the easiest and the topmost path of advancing spiritual life, which Lord Krishna explains in
Bhagavad Gita, simply become my devotee. And very easy for a devotee because then simply a person
has to desire to advance in spiritual life. So basis one's desire, the devotee is given guidance.
So simply one has to desire very strongly that only eagerness to advance is the price that we
have to pay. Nothing else. If a person is very very eager to advance, then automatically strength
will be given by Krishna, knowledge will be given by Krishna, and skills also will be given by
Krishna. Everything is supplied by Krishna. So our process is so nice. But then this desire,
this eagerness, it is very very difficult to attain. Even after doing Sukriti, good pious
activities for millions of lives, Koti means crores of lives, you do not get this eagerness.
So our eagerness, this desire to advance in spiritual life, all the desires that we have,
it simply depends upon our association. That is why it is told, Sadhu Sangha, Sadhu Sangha,
Sarva Shastra Koi. It is very important, all the scriptures still, please do Sadhu Sangha,
Sadhu Sangha, live in the association of devotees. All our desires that we have as we have discussed
before in right from Jigyasa session, Art of Happiness, two previous sessions also we have
discussed. All the desires that we have, they are simply because of association. The house that I
want to have, I met with some people who told me this kind of house is good, so I want to have that
house. The car that I want to have, simply because of association. The job that I want to have,
because of some people told, this job is very good, these skills are required, I developed desire,
worked hard for it. So whatever desires I have in life, I desire to see some very nice movie,
I desire to see some very nice movie, because of association. I associate with the people
promoting that movie, who have seen that movie, so I have got certain association I have had.
If I do not have any contact with the movie, with the trailer of the movie, with the people
who have seen it, I will not have desire to watch the movie. And when I am not able to have it,
I become disturbed. This is called illusion of life. So that is why if we have to have right
desire, we have to have right association. That is why entire spiritual life is based upon one's
association. Simply if one is able to keep himself in the association of devotees, pure devotees,
automatically this eagerness will be built in the body.
It will come up in the body. And when we are eager, Krishna gives everything.
So competition in spiritual life, when a person sees somebody is doing well, he sees how much
mercy Krishna is having upon the soul. He or she is able to advance very nicely. So a devotee takes
inspiration and he becomes enthusiastic. I also want to receive this mercy. May Krishna give this
mercy to me also. So in this way, he also tries to compete. So this competition is full of pleasure.
However, competition is important. But rather than advancing for competition,
material life competition is who will go fast to hell.
So ultimately all are going to hell or all are committing sinful activities. Who will go fast?
Who will reach faster into hell? But spiritual competition, so this devoted is very nice
competition, came first in the international book distribution competition. So Prabhupada is writing,
So this task of yours, rest assured, has not gone unnoticed by Krishna.
So somebody has done very nice in spiritual competition. So Krishna has taken note of that
and Krishna will bless you very nicely, Prabhupada is telling. So always keep on chanting Hare Krishna
and always keep on thinking the lotus feet of Krishna. Prabhupada gives very nice benediction
to the devotee. So it is very important to do seva, Prabhupada told. And seva with a very great
spirit. Whenever any devotee like this was doing seva with great spirit, Prabhupada was very happy.
Yes, with this enthusiasm you are engaged, you are competing, you are taking stress for serving
Krishna, physical stress, mental stress, but this physical and mental stress gives us spiritual
bliss. We take a little anxiety in order to serve Krishna. In this way when a person with his heart
and soul, with his energy, kriyasu means by manual labor, he struggles to serve Krishna, seva, then
then the pure devotee, the spiritual master, they reveal this knowledge to us.
This is the secret of knowing the Bhagavad Gita, entering into the mystery of Bhagavad Gita.
So everything, entire spiritual advancement depends upon our service attitude.
We cannot see Krishna, we cannot understand Krishna, we cannot hear Krishna, Hare Krishna
Mahamantra, the spiritual sound using our endeavor by being very attentive, by being very intelligent,
we cannot understand, no.
You cannot understand Krishna by your senses. Just like the sun rises of its own accord in the
morning, then you can see the sun. At night, how much ever hard you may try, you will not be able
to see the sun. In a similar fashion, how much ever hard you may try to understand, who am I,
I am spirit soul, there is super soul, Paramatma in the heart, there is Vaikuntha, Krishna.
It is not possible to understand unless Krishna gives this knowledge from within the heart.
The spiritual master gives this knowledge from within the heart. It is not possible.
When a Jiva becomes seva, becomes service oriented, he develops very nice service attitude.
He himself manifests his glories, his knowledge unto such a service oriented devotee.
So such confusion we can face in our lives. So we are free, we are encouraged to ask questions
in order to seek clarity, just like Arjuna is asking question. Krishna, you are telling to fight
and you are telling to follow the path of intelligence also. Buddhi yoga, simply by using
your intelligence, you can make your life perfect. Then why you are engaging in this ghastly warfare?
So like this confusion can come. So to solve the confusion, please ask questions.
But question should be accompanied by surrender and seva.
Surrender means simple instructions are given. So I was very happy to hear that we gave instruction
to some people to as soon as they get up, they should chant in the morning, they are chanting.
I told them to read every day without fail, minimum certain minutes and they are able to do that.
So many, many people have picked up the sadhana regular thing. So surrender, we cannot surrender
completely. Then whatever degree we can decide that much I have to do everything
I have to do every day. And then everything all the opportunity slowly will be given to us.
So surrender. I cannot follow instructions completely some degree I'm able to follow.
Let me not pull back my surrender. At least these many minutes in minutes of my day I have
surrendered to Krishna. And when I completely surrender to Krishna, Krishna reveals himself unto
me. So Arjuna is having this confusion. What is the confusion? The confusion which all of us have
in the beginning stages. We think Krishna consciousness means some inertia. Krishna
consciousness means we are telling people to leave all their duties, sit down in a house or
somewhere in some jungle and chant Hare Krishna and like that. So that is what Arjuna is asking.
Please tell me decisively what is better for me. You are telling Buddha yoga by use of intelligence
a person can liberate himself and then you are telling so Arjuna please fight. So what should I
do? If simply by using intelligence I can make my life perfect. What is the need of killing so
many people? What is the need of fighting like a Kshatriya? So Krishna gives the answers. What is
the answer? Let us see.
The blessed lord said, oh sinless Arjuna, I have already explained that there are two classes of
men who realize the self. Some are inclined to understand him by empirical philosophical speculation
and others are inclined to know him by devotional work.
So there are two kinds of people. So one category they want to read the scriptures where description
of Parabrahma, the supreme personality is given and they want to understand God by reading the
descriptions of God. They want to understand the spiritual science by reading the Upanishads,
by reading the Saitas, Tantras and all these things. Another category also wants to understand
the Parabrahma, Krishna supreme lord because unless somebody understands Krishna
His rebirth will not stop. Diseases, old age and death are because of this wonderful material body that we have got.
So we'll keep on getting such miserable bodies. We will not be able to have a spiritual body if we don't
understand scientifically the activities, birth etc of Krishna. So some people want to understand
these things simply by reading, by churning their brains and another category, by doing work.
So what is the difference between two?
So what is the difference between two?
So one process Sankhya Yoga is also known as Dhyana Yoga and another process of doing activities
for Krishna it is called Karma Yoga. So some people think, sometimes we meet some people,
some businessmen, they are frustrated. They tell me, I want to take enough of this thing.
And many people who are talking of becoming billionaires before this Covid,
now they are telling, I think I should take Sannyas. There is not much in the material world.
So Prabhupada would recommend many many people that while you are wasting your life, already you
have become old, now please come to Vrindavan and chant, engage your life, whatever balance is
there in serving Krishna. And some people do come to Vrindavan like that in Jagannath Puri.
And when they would come, Prabhupada would ask, oh you have come for Sannyas and what happened to
your vast property that you have built? Oh yeah that is there that I have left for wife and children.
Then Prabhupada says there is no meaning of your Sannyas.
Nyas means renunciation. Monkey also is renunciant. He also lives with, lives in jungle. He does not
wear any clothes, lives on a tree, under a tree, eats only fruits. This is what a Sannyasi is supposed to do.
But then he is having 10 dozen female monkeys also with him. So the tendency to enjoy the
attachments have not gone. Such kind of Sannyas is not going to help.
So Prabhupada told, you have come. But Satnyas, Sannyas, Sat means truth, Absolute Truth, Krishna,
Nyas, when a person renounces to engage himself in the service of Krishna, Absolute Truth, he is called a Sannyasi.
When a person has renounced for Krishna,
so you have come but your vast property, money, everything is still there with your family,
that means you are still attached to your family. And with this attachment, your Sannyas will not be fruitful.
So Krishna is telling here to Arjuna, Arjuna was willing to take same kind of Sannyas.
Because of attachment, he is not willing to fight with his family members. Oh, they are my family members.
Pitama, my grandfather, my cousins, my brothers-in-laws, everyone is there on the other side, they would be killed.
This attachment is there in the heart. Because of this attachment, he wants to take Sannyas.
So sometimes, some people, when we preach, they want to, yes, Prabhu, I want to take Sannyas, I want to become Brahmacharya,
I want to join the movement. Why? Because they are not able to perform nicely in their college, they are getting backlogs,
there is no hope of getting degree. Then, okay, let me leave it. No, this kind of renunciation is not recommended.
So when a person leaves the work out of fear of the duties, that is called renunciation.
So this is not. Renunciation should be in perfect knowledge, when the mind has become completely purified.
So that is why Lord Krishna is telling, not merely by merely abstaining from work, can one achieve freedom from reaction.
So people think if I stop doing work, I'll become free from the bad reactions. We suffer only because of reactions.
Reactions of sinful activities, breaking the laws of nature, that is called Paap.
My boss is scolding me, I'm having loss of money, loss of property, physical, mental disturbance, some people are not treating me well.
Everything is because of our past sinful life. So that is why in some religions, it is told, do not do this thing, do not do that thing,
do not tell lies, do not tell lies, do not tell lies, do not tell lies, do not tell lies, do not tell lies, do not tell lies.
So it is told, do not do this thing, do not do that thing, do not tell lies, do not commit violence, do not do this thing.
That's it. So Krishna is telling, no, simply by not doing something, abstaining from work, one cannot attain freedom from reaction.
Nor by renunciation alone can one attain perfection. Yes, yes, now I've taken sannyas, no.
So simply becoming a false sannyasi will not lead one to perfection. Why? Lord Krishna further explains.
Even for a second, all men are forced to act helplessly according to the impulses born of the modes of material nature.
Therefore, no one can refrain from doing something nor even for a moment.
So Krishna is telling, very important point, all men are forced to act helplessly.
How? According to the impulses born of the modes of material nature, a person who is tamasic, he will be forced to remain dirty.
He will not be able to clean himself, his room, his surroundings, his cupboard, etc.
Forced to remain dirty and helpless, he would want to do something, he will not be allowed to improve his situation.
Helpless, the more we feel helpless in our life, I'm not able to do anything.
So we are heavily under the tamasic influence.
So tamas means completely helpless.
Rajas is also helpless, but little more freedom is there to the living entity than tamasic.
But he is also helpless, helplessly dragged towards sense enjoyment.
He cannot control, tongue is pulling, oh let me eat cake again.
Yesterday also, today also you take, again I'll be surrendering to my tongue.
Eyes are willing to see something, I'll be pulled again, helpless, sense enjoyment.
So all men are forced to act helplessly, we are helplessly being pushed by the laws of nature.
So you told Arjuna, now you are declining to fight, but you are rajasic, your body is, Arjuna is pure devotee.
But for our example, Krishna is telling.
So fighting will happen.
Now if you not fight according to religious principles, you will be forced to fight by the modes of nature in future.
Activities cannot be avoided.
Therefore no one can refrain from doing something not even for a moment.
Every moment a person is doing something or the other.
Either on the gross platform or on the mental platform, a person is always active.
So Krishna is telling.
So people think going to Himalayas and mountains and that is called spiritual life.
Yes, that is also spiritual life, spiritual process of jnana, jnanis.
But such a spiritual process is recommended to the people who cannot act in Krishna consciousness, cannot act in the service of Krishna.
This higher knowledge is not there.
Then yes, you can take that.
But that also not ordinarily.
Here Krishna tells.
It's like Billo Mangal Thakur we discussed the other day.
So he took sannyas immediately.
But because he was addicted to enjoy with the prostitute, as soon as he saw another beautiful woman, he started chasing that woman also.
So in this fashion, if a person takes to sannyas prematurely, heart purification has not happened.
It will simply create disturbance in the social order.
So Arjuna was willing to take such kind of sannyas and become jnani yogi.
He will simply apply my intelligence and I don't want to do my prescribed duties.
So Krishna is warning over and over again.
Even for a moment, you cannot stay without doing any work.
You will be forced to do work.
Externally, you may stop fighting, but your mind will be dwelling on the objects of sense enjoyment.
And such a person certainly deludes himself.
He's cheating himself and others also and is called a pretender.
So a pretender is not tolerated in spiritual life.
So very honestly, you tell you don't pretend like a Brahmana.
You don't pretend like a XYZ.
You accept why I'm a Kshatriya.
I cannot be Brahmana.
It's OK.
You will not be allowed to take sannyas.
Kshatriya is only allowed to go up to one Prastha level.
And no, no, I'm a Vaishya.
Then only up to Grahastha level, not even Vana Prastha.
I am a Shudra.
Even Brahmacharya, you cannot follow.
You cannot follow even Gurukul.
Only Grahastha Ashram for you.
But Grahastha Ashram rules and regulations you have to follow.
So every person is given chance.
A kid of nursery standard given less syllabus.
Learn A for apple, B for ball or like that.
And then you get promoted to next level.
Then you get promoted to next level.
By this gradual promotion, one day he'll be given heavy syllabus.
Initially only he moves around with a book of algebra.
He will fail.
Neither learn A for apple, B for ball.
What to speak of algebra?
In a similar fashion, directly if a person takes to the process of Jnana Yoga
without undergoing the gradual purification of hard prescribed duties,
it will be simply disturbance in the social order.
So pretender is not allowed.
So you choose, you declare your level.
I belong to this level.
And then everyone will respect you.
Follow the duties of that order.
So in this process of yoga,
it begins with doing the prescribed duties very very nicely.
So when a person does his karma prescribed duties very nicely,
his heart becomes purified.
Unique duties are recommended to different people.
Just like some exercises are recommended to certain people.
For asthma you do this exercise.
For blood pressure you do this exercise.
For some other disease you do some exercise.
And then your blood, your organs will get strength.
You will get cured of disease.
In a similar fashion,
the duties which are mentioned in the Vedas,
all of us have certain kind of enjoying tendency,
certain contamination in the heart.
So in order to clean the heart of the tendencies of enjoyment,
material enjoyment,
such duties are recommended.
So following the prescribed duties,
rules and regulations of Shastras,
doing our duties is very very important for such a person.
And doing those duties very nicely,
when a person in this life or any future life,
he is able to come to the level of Brahmana.
And then again he has to follow Brahmachari.
And if he is advanced enough,
or if he is not advanced enough,
go through grahasthashram, vanaprastha,
and then sannyas.
He is allowed to take sannyas.
And the sannyas,
once a person takes sannyas,
then he can start the process of jnana yoga.
Unless your senses are under control,
where is the platform of knowledge?
Chanakya Pandit told,
a person who is intelligent,
he cannot enjoy senses in this material world.
And a person who is enjoying his senses,
there is no question of rising to the platform of knowledge.
Because only a person who is dreaming,
he can enjoy a dream world.
Similarly, these illusory pleasures of this world,
of satisfying the body which you are not are,
satisfying the mind which you not are,
can only be done by a person
who is under hallucination,
hallucination under great ignorance
that I am this body.
So only an ignorant person
can enjoy in this world.
And if somebody is enjoying in this world,
he is ignorant.
He does not understand this enjoyment,
simply increases anxiety of my heart,
does not give me relief.
So he is foolish like a child,
spoiling his teeth by eating more chocolates,
or by eating mud.
So Arjuna prematurely was willing
to go to the Jnana level without doing prescribed duties,
so Krishna did not recommend.
Krishna told, please do Karma Yoga,
don't directly jump to that level.
Now,
it does not mean that a Jnana yogi
is more advanced,
has got a better chance than a Karma Yogi
to do the activity.
So those people
who do not have any knowledge of Krishna,
they follow Jnana Yoga,
then they start meditating in the advanced
level of Jnana Yoga,
they become Dhyanis,
and then by meditating they realize Krishna
and engage in the service of Krishna.
But if a person has right knowledge,
then from the beginning he can engage
in service of Krishna,
and he can make his spiritual life perfect.
So,
just for some people,
who don't have knowledge that how action
can bring perfection of spiritual life,
such people are advised
to take to the process of Jnana Yoga.
And that is a very slow process,
because earlier lifespan was very
great.
People would live for thousand and ten thousand
and one lakh of years also in Satyuga.
So one lakh of years you keep on
thinking, thinking, thinking, you keep on doing
research.
And then finally,
you may come to the right conclusion, right knowledge,
but now, what to speak of
one lakh years, we do not have
even hundred years,
and time is not there, our jobs,
our studies suck all our time,
senses are always disturbed,
so that process is not
applicable even now.
However, this Karma Yoga, this process
is very very easily applicable,
and people can do this and advance
very nicely. Thus, Lord Krishna tells
Sarjana, please don't become pretender
on the pretense of becoming
a Jnana Yogi, you have attachment,
simply you might
take sannyas, but your mind will always
think of sense enjoyment.
yas tuvindriya na manasa
niyamya rabhate arjuna
karma indriya karma yogam
asakta asa vishishyate
On the other hand, you control the senses
by mind and engages his active organs
in work of devotion without attachment
is by far superior.
So Krishna is telling
a pretender
Jnana Yogi,
don't try to become that,
just control the senses by mind
and engage active organs
in work of devotion but without attachment
it is very important.
I am doing the activity just like
a cashier, he sits on the bank
he is not at all attached to the money
which he is collecting.
In a similar fashion,
a spiritualist may do all his duties
very very nicely.
There is no need to change your profession,
there is no need to change your
change your position,
change your place.
Wherever you are,
simply keep on hearing
topics about Krishna,
the holy names of Krishna.
And then a person can make
his spiritual life perfect very very soon.
But such works should be done
in devotion.
So that is why it is called
karma yoga not karma.
Karma means simply doing your duties.
Yoga means
doing your duties for Krishna
so that you can link yourself up to Krishna
so attachment should not be there
because I am not doing duty
to enjoy the result of the duty.
But I want to enjoy the result
of duties to Krishna
so I should not be attached to the results of my duty.
So Krishna is giving now his final decree
Perform your prescribed duty
for action is better than inaction
a man cannot maintain
even maintain his physical body without work.
However,
So don't get up
simply by
reading the 8th shloka.
Oh yes, Krishna has told to do duty very nicely
Yes, let me double up
my research work.
Let me write instead of one program
two computer programs every day.
Oh, instead of doing 10 hours of business
I will work 20 hours in my business.
Yes, I will do my duties very very nicely.
Duties are to be done for whom?
Yes,
without attachment.
Whatever result I get
I will give it to my family members
I will get to my neighbors
to my society I will give.
So Krishna is telling
only for the sake of
yajna or vishnu
yajna means vishnu
the scriptures mention
work
as a sacrifice for vishnu
has to be performed
otherwise
work binds one to this material world
so Krishna is not telling
don't become gyani
simply do your prescribed duties
nicely do your prescribed duties
but yajna arthaat
do your prescribed duties for
doing yajna for satisfaction of
vishnu or lord krishna
otherwise
work binds one to this material world
you have to come to reap the
results of that work
either good or bad
therefore a son of kunti perform your prescribed duties
for his satisfaction
and in that way you will always remain
unattached and free from bondage
tadartham karmakonte
muktasanga samachara
now somebody may ask
for his satisfaction
for whose satisfaction
krishna only is vishnu
why is telling that
you work for his vishnu
satisfaction as if lord vishnu is some other
person
so the understanding is
lord krishna
quotes various vedic
authorities
just in order to explain
that referring to authorities is very important
spiritual life is not according to me
the rules just like law of gravity
is a law
a crude example that may also not be correct
people are discovering now
a crude example law means law
in a similar fashion
in this world god is there
spirit soul is there
there is a unique relation
it cannot change with changing religions
cannot change with
changing nations
in all the nations this body is there consciousness is there
same laws apply to everyone
so krishna
is quoting simply those laws
so that is why krishna in bhagavad gita
is quoting various other
shruti shastras, smriti shastras
other scriptures also
so this verse might have been quoted in other scriptures
that yajna arthaat karmano
anyatra do work only for the
satisfaction of vishnu
tadartham karmakonte only for his
satisfaction you perform the work
so krishna is simply quoting to arjuna
which might have quoted elsewhere
otherwise krishna tells to arjuna
man mana bhau mad bhakto mad bhakta
become my devotee
mam ekam sharnam raja
surrender only unto me he declares
i am that god but here
because krishna is quoting something else
so that is why such description
is coming for his satisfaction
as if god is somebody else like that
so in this way
it is very very clear so this is how
we do not know people have told us
duty nicely work nicely but they don't tell us
duty has to be done
for the satisfaction of vishnu
then wherever we are whatever we are doing
we can experience
extraordinary happiness
and when we have this happiness
controlling the senses becomes very very easily
and with this easy sense
control ever increasing
spiritual happiness the living entity
makes his spiritual life perfect
and gets freed from the process of birth and death
so that is why
krishna's clear direction
is given to arjuna don't become
a false gyani anyway
it is very difficult to become gyani first of all
you have to take sannyas only brahmanas
can take sannyas very those
who are exalted in consciousness
very few people handful will be able to do that
however a much
advanced and simpler process is being recommended
however your mind
body works do their duty nicely
for satisfaction of vishnu
in this way simply follow karma yoga
for satisfaction of vishnu
and your life becomes perfect
so this is the
version of lord krishna and further
what is this yajna
what is this cycle
this is further explained
which we will understand in the next class
