So we have seen one more incident of the great institution
Failing again
So in the last two months this has been
The seventh suicide in the best Institute of the country
So
How much I think the intake is very very less just 30 40 seats
It used to be when I was aware of this entrance and all
Only 30 40 people of the lakhs of people who appear for the seats of medicine. They're able to make it
to Ames, Delhi
the brightest of the bright and
And
Just imagine those very bright people after successfully proving their accomplishment
Studying their syllabus and performing very very nicely so-called immensely successful
But they are in great depression and they are committing suicide can you just imagine seven
and
three of them are doctors and
One was one or two were students something like that and others had completed their degrees
So after finishing your degree from the well-known most well-known Institute of the country
so why this is happening and
This we see it is happening everywhere
So now people are clueless
Two generations ago
Mostly people were taking to agrarian
practices they would cultivate their farms and live very happily and
They got enamored by the city life. Oh, just see city so nice
You can have movies over there. You can have a lot of enjoyment
You can have pubs and drinking and all sorts of facilities
They started leaving their farms or started children sending their children out
For you, please go to city or let us go to city and enjoy a very nice life
But in the last few decades we have seen
This last generation has seen that all those dreams for which people left their agriculture and farms and settled in the city life
All those dreams have got frustrated
So why what is missing?
it is
They are successful in whatever parameters you have said they have performed very very nicely
Then why they could not attain the objective of all those endeavors
So before we go into Bhagavad-gita today, I would like to share with you a very very powerful shloka from Shreemad Bhagavatam
Shreemad Bhagavatam has 18,000 verses after we finish Bhagavad-gita. We can move to Shreemad Bhagavatam
That is postgraduate study of spirituality
So, let us see one very important shloka which will throw some light upon what we have discussed and what we are going to discuss
So here you must be seeing on the screen
This is
This is first canto of Bhagavatam second can chapter verse number 10 Bhagavatam has got 12 cantos
So this is from first canto very beginning
so very very important shloka it says
What does it mean it tells
kamasya kamasya means of desires
na indriya priti
Life desires should never be directed toward sense gratification gratification means enjoyment sense enjoyment
One should desire only a healthy life or self preservation
Since a human being is meant for inquiry about the absolute truth
Nothing else should be the goal of one's works
Kamasya na indriya priti we all have various desires
So life desire should never be directed towards sense enjoyment
So then why should a person live? What should a person desire?
As far as bodily comforts are concerned one should desire only a healthy life or self preservation
Not self indulgence and luxury. This is the version of Bhagavatam
Only healthy life since a human being no
Why I should just try to preserve my body not indulge in satisfying the body more and more no
Then why what else will I do?
Maintaining a body is very very simple with few hundred or few thousand rupees. I can very easily maintain entire family
So then rest of the time what will I do no since a human being is meant for inquiry about absolute truth
Nothing else should be the goal of one's works
Nartho yascheha karmabhi karmabhi means actions artha means purpose
Nothing else should be the goal of one's works nartho yascheha karmabhi
The goal of one's work is to inquire understand about absolute truth
What is actually truth of this life? What is this entire world? What is this going on of which I am part of?
So to save time for this inquiry one should desire only a healthy life and self preservation
So purport is also very fantastic. So Srila Prabhupada explains
The completely bewildered material civilization is wrongly directed
Towards the fulfillment of desires in sense gratification
So we think civilization is advancing it is advancing in AI robotics and many other advanced sciences
But Bhagavatam is mentioning completely bewildered bewildered means confused and puzzled material civilization
Material civilization spiritual civilization two kinds of civilization civilized means
A systematic way of living so we also have some systems in our society
But all these systems are based on the concept I am matter this body which is made up of matter
Bring more matter to satisfy this material body that is material civilization
It is wrongly directed towards fulfillment of desires in sense gratification
In such civilization in all spheres of life the ultimate end is sense gratification
Ultimately I want to enjoy my senses whatever can be the field
In politics social service altruism philanthropy and ultimately in religion or even in salvation
The very same tint of sense gratification is ever increasingly predominant
So a person can follow politics or he can do some social service
He could be altruistic helping others philanthropy and he can be religious also he can go to temples also very nicely
But even when he is going to temples or churches or mosques he is following any religion the purpose is
Same sense gratification
So one devotee was telling he is brahmachari now
So we were discussing that what was your background how do you how did he join and come in
So he told yes I was pious and I was very fond of worshipping lord hanuman
And for 10 years I worshipped lord hanuman very very nicely and then
He was supposed to give some examination finally in college
And then he desired hanumanji at least please give me these many percentage of marks it is very very important exam
And I have worshipped you so nicely I have please fulfill this desire
And then he got 30 percent of what he desired
So then he told this this is not done so this worship is not useful and then he stopped worshipping
So even if you follow religion ultimately or even in salvation
So some people
After religion after all the sciences enjoyment, they want moksha salvation
But why a person goes for moksha same sense gratification
Enjoyment in this material world could not satisfy me. So now let me leave all the enjoyment and let me
Have moksha why because I think this moksha will give me will give me enjoyment
My personal enjoyment is the foundation of all the activities you can go politics
You can go social service philanthropy
You can become
Doctor you can become engineer you can become husband you can become wife
But the purpose is personal sense gratification
In the political field the leaders of men fight with one another to fulfill their personal sense gratification
Why are they fighting with each other
My gratification the voters adore the so-called leaders only when they promise sense gratification
As soon as the voters are dissatisfied in their own satisfaction. They dethrone the leaders
So every basis the basis everywhere the basis is sense gratification
I am giving some votes to the political leaders. Why if he promises I will be satisfied
satisfy your senses
Your eyes would be pleased if you elect me
I your ears would be pleased your pocket would be pleased so you can please your senses very very nicely
Again sense gratification
And when there is disturbance they dethrone the leaders and the leaders must always disappoint the voters by not satisfying their senses
Why?
Because by satisfying senses you are not satisfied. That is why they keep on changing the government
They will vote for the government and then they will change it
The same is applicable in all other fields
No one is serious about the problems of life
So the life is full of problems we can see
We all see how we are fraught with various problems
One problem we solve there is two take I solve two take then there is stomachache stomachache
I solve then there is some issue in the family family issue. I resolve there is some issue in the office
That I resolve there is some issue with the finances that I resolve there is some death that I resolve
There is something else natural disaster. We keep on solving
One problem after another and no one is serious about the problems of life. We are so mad. Oh more enjoyment more enjoyment
No one is seriously thinking and the real problems of life are birth death old age and disease
Even those who are on the path of salvation desire to become one with absolute truth
And desire to commit spiritual suicide for sense gratification
But the bhagavatam says one should not live for sense gratification
Why we are lending so much credence to bhagavatam because
Whatever knowledge we have in the world of all the sciences physics chemistry max civil and whatever we hear of
so the knowledge is there in the
vedas
But even after writing all these vedas the author
Feel of yasudev. He was not satisfied
So vedas got satisfaction when he wrote shreemad bhagavatam
So that is why you may have expertise
In yeah, if you have any questions, you can please park it many questions will be answered in course of the session
Otherwise, we will take it up towards the end
So even if a person has knowledge of all the sciences
Of all the open issues of medicine of militaries warfare everything still he will not be satisfied vedhya was not satisfied
unless he described
The crux of all knowledge bhagavatam. So what does bhagavatam mention?
one should not live for
sense gratification
One should satisfy the senses only in so much as required for self-preservation and not for sense gratification
So
The senses require they demand something basic demand is that you have to satisfy you have to eat something
The tongue demands some taste so only that much taste you can enjoy
Which is required for keeping the body and soul together to preserve
More than that if you want to enjoy the senses, it will only bring misery in life
Because the body is made of senses which also requires certain amount of satisfaction
There are regulative directions for satisfaction of such senses
So this body is a machine
Just like with every machine comes a manual this body this universe
How to have optimal usage the vedas give the instructions?
So that is why how to satisfy the senses there are instructions
You want to eat so vedas are mentioning this kind of food you should take in the morning time
This kind of food you should take in the afternoon this kind of food you should take in the evening
And this much solid should you take this much liquid should be taken and this much space should be left for the gas for proper digestion
In this weather this season this climate such kind of food is good for the body
If you have this tendency in your body, then this kind of food you should eat this kind of food
You should avoid this is called ayurveda
Park shasta so all the sciences very very nicely described which kind of machine you have got
What is the environment around you basis that what kind of food you should have?
like this for
Enjoyment how to have enjoyment in this world enjoyment is not denied, but the vedas give their direction
In a limited way for self-preservation. You can enjoy the senses in the direction as mentioned in the vedas
But the senses are not meant for unrestricted enjoyment preservation you can do
for example
The marriage or the combination of man with a woman is necessary for progeny, but it is not meant for sense enjoyment
We think marriage or combination of man and woman is for sense enjoyment
That is why the whole world is in chaos
Because they don't see any enjoyment coming from it. They are getting more and more frustrated by it
So it is not for enjoyment it is for progeny
In the absence of voluntary restraint there is propaganda for family planning
But foolish men do not know that family planning is automatically executed
If as soon as there is search after absolute truth
The seekers of absolute truth are never allured by unnecessary engagement since sense gratification
Because the serious students seeking absolute truth are always
Overwhelmed with the work of researching the truth in every sphere of life. Therefore ultimate and must be seeking absolute truth
and
That sort of engagement will make one happy
Because he will be less engaged in varieties of sense gratification and what is that absolute truth it will be explained in the further shlokas
So this people do not know
that
Satisfaction of the senses is only meant for preservation of the body
If there is no taste in the senses
Then a person cannot continue why a person would eat if eating is not tasty
How would the world go on if there is no pleasure in the combination of man and woman?
But such pleasure has been given
So that the soul can continue living in this body and more soul can get chances to get more bodies
Because in this body you can derive it to get the highest satisfaction of life highest satisfaction of life is not sense enjoyment
If you make sense enjoyment unrestricted enjoyment as the aim of life, then we will always be frustrated as we have seen
How it is happening?
So satisfaction of the senses can never satisfy you unrestrictedly unlimitedly if you want unlimited happiness in life
Unlimited satisfaction and ecstasy then what a person should do here it is mentioned
Seeking after the absolute truth that sort of engagement will make one happy
So when a person does jeevasya tattvijjigyaasanaartho yashchihakarmabhi
He starts inquiring. What is absolute truth absolute means
His existence is not dependent upon anything else not relative existence
I am existing now. I will not exist in future. This identity is finished. This form is finished form is anyway changing with the passage of time
So I cannot tell i'm beautiful. I cannot tell i am ugly
You are ugly before and at the time of birth, then you become beautiful. Then again you become ugly
You cannot tell i'm tall you were very small. Now you are tall again. You will finish
And you will be ash. We will not be ash body will be ash
So in this way, I cannot tell i'm smart. I am dull. I am intelligent. I am black and i'm white
I'm indian. I am american. I am engineer
Who are we we have never thought of if somebody asks, who are you? I am this
And i'm indian i'm american i'm engineer i'm scientist
I am doctor. I am ca i'm cfa. No, sir. You are not cfa. You will not be cfa
Who are you these are designations labeled upon you
So this is called inquiry about absolute truth, who am I
Living within this body which is changing forms and names
And what is the source?
Of myself how I have come here and how this body has come here. This is called inquiry about absolute truth
So like this if you do research oh I have come from my father my father has come from his father
His father has come from his father in this way if you keep on tracing tracing tracing one day we will
Understand
after research of many many lives
From where the entire world has come into existence. We will understand. What is the purpose of this world?
So this kind of engagement
Seeking the absolute truth makes a person happy
So this people do not know
So this is called brahmanical civilization
So people were educated so that they can do research
So researchers are not happy in aims because they are researching simply after the body
Within this body there is spirit. There is consciousness if they do research about consciousness, then they will be happy
Consciousness then they will be happy
So the subject matter of research should be spirit absolute spirit absolute truth
And one more advanced level then seeking searching after absolute truth is
Knowing and serving the absolute truth. So what is that absolute truth that bhagavatam describes?
That absolute truth is called brahma paramatma and bhagavan and who is that bhagavan om namo bhagavate vasudev. I
That is vasudev. That is free krishna. He is origin of the entire world all the souls
The bodies which the souls are acquiring all the universes they are emanating from him that personality
We can create small microbes from our
Bodies small insects can come out of it
So we are also creating some living entities from this body and within our body so many insects we generate
And that is where some people get tapeworms in the stomach when proper digestion is not there the food is
The food is
Lying there in the stomach for a very very long time
So you produce tapeworms within your body. This is the principle we can also produce many living entities in this body from this body
So god can produce unlimited living entities from his body
So all these bodies and all the living entities if you do scientific research those people who have already finished the research they are concluding this thing
So when we engage ourselves in the loving service of the absolute truth that brings a person happiness
So today's civilization is completely bewildered because they do not know
How to become happy so happiness is not by enjoyment of senses
But because i'm not this sensitive body but by serving the doing research about absolute truth god
So this philosophy was preached to lord by lord krishna to arjuna
Yes
So lord krishna explained this philosophy as we have seen in the first two chapters
and
Krishna explained you are not the body. You are spirit soul. This is what we teach to any new person
So satisfying body will not satisfy you and after this krishna tells to arjuna now you fight
Sarjuna is bewildered krishna. What is this? You just told all these activities are of no use
And because i am not this body i am spirit soul and now you are again telling you engage in activity further
This is what many people ask the question and many people get confused
This is what many people ask the question and many people get the impression
that
Oh, so it means we should stop doing our duties stop doing our jobs. Stop all the activities. No activity should be done
But activity should be done for tattvajigyaasa as it is mentioned here in bhagavatam
The purpose of all activities tattvajigyaasa
So that is why arjuna is telling oh krishna understood
So I will leave my duty and I will do tattvajigyaasa. I will understand this absolute truth. I'll follow buddhi yoga
So he wanted to read the vedas leave everything become a beggar something like that
He was proposing to take sannyas immediately. So krishna told no that is not recommended
For general populace
As long as our heart is not cleansed if we leave all the duties immediately
Still material desires will continue and such a sannyasi will again fall for material activities will be a disgrace to society
And to a general sannyasis also
So that is why completely dedicating yourself to read the vedas understand absolute truth
It is not recommended unless a person is very very highly highly qualified
And heart is completely cleansed of all material desires. You are not supposed to leave your duties
So that is why there is a process which is called yajna people do not know
So lord krishna very nicely explained to arjuna arjuna earlier
You were thinking I would fight because by fighting I would satisfy my senses or somebody's senses
So now also you should fight
but
The objective of five should not be sense gratification your personal enjoyment
But then what should I do? Why should I fight for?
What should I do? Why should I fight for? So krishna explained to arjuna
yajna
Do your karmana activities for yajna
You do not have right upon the result of your activities upon the fruits of your activities you do your activities nicely
But the result of activity fruit of activity is for yajna
Yajna means sacrifice and yajna means vishnu lord vishnu lord krishna
So this science is not known to people
So all the activity should only be done for tatvijayasa and tatvijayasa happens by doing yajnas
Sacrificing the fruits of our activities
So srilaprabhupada explains yajnas can be broadly classified in two categories
One category is
The yajna is done for transcendental knowledge
And another category is yajna sacrifice of material possessions
So the second kind of yajna it is meant for the souls who are very very
Advanced heart is completely purified of material contaminations
Otherwise, all of us have tendency of some kind of enjoyment. No. No, I want to become
Manager, I want to become doctor. I want to become educator. I want to become a businessman. So people are not discouraged
Artificially, you cannot suppress repress your tendencies krishna also told arjuna. What will repression accomplish?
So artificially you need not
do repression
Of your desires
but
Everyone should be encouraged to work for sacrifice for performing yajna
So yajna start with again people do not know that ultimately all the yajnas are meant for satisfying krishna
krishna tells
bhok taram yajna tapasam sarva loka maheshwaram
So people do not understand this understanding of God is very very difficult subject matter a person has to be out of all
Addictions of material enjoyment in order to have sanity to understand absolute truth and God
Just like a person who is under influence of drugs and alcohol cannot understand what is truth
So not just drugs and alcohol are intoxicating any kind of sense enjoyment is intoxicating
Some people tell oh prabhu, then my life would be very dry. Why you are telling we should not enjoy
It is same thing if you and me drink shall we not enjoy? No, we will enjoy
Because as soon as the liquor goes into the body it will give you
Uh a different effect which is enjoyable, but why do we hate it?
Why don't we want to enjoy because we understand the results are very very dangerous
If you take drugs heroin cocaine, you definitely fly in the air and enjoyment would be nice
But why don't you do it?
Why you don't want such enjoyment because you understand the after effects are very very harmful
And there is no question of understanding truth as long as a person is
Under the effects of such intoxicants
So liquor and alcohol are very very intoxicating
Similarly any kind of sensual enjoyment is also intoxicating
Any kind of enjoyment of eyes tongue ear
belly skin
Is intoxicating and a person forgets his real identity, which is spirit soul completely different from body
so that is why unless we are very strict in following the
Our chanting our reading and four regulative principles
Then we will fall down to this hallucinatory material platform
So as soon as you drink you are hallucinating you do not know what is reality
What is the street? Where is house? Where am I lying? What am I talking something? I will talk and I'll forget
Such is the state of a living entity who has dedicated his life for sense enjoyment completely away from reality
And how much ever a person can exert his mind sometimes people get confused. Please explain me
How do I understand? I'm not body and spirit. You can never understand sir. Can you explain a drunkard?
That sir, this is your house
And you are lying down on street. This is not your bedroom. Oh, you also please leave such nice AC is there he will tell
So he's hallucinating and you cannot make him understand
So first of all you have to wait that the effect of the liquor is over
He's on platform of sanity then there is question of knowledge
So in a similar fashion it is very easy to understand any kind of sensual enjoyment is addiction only
It does not satisfy you you get addicted to it. You cannot live without it
So every kind of
Enjoyment of senses is addictive and just imagine if there is a family where morning to evening mother father children. They are all drinking
Or taking drugs you will call it a nice family
Bewildered family that is why bhagavatam is calling material civilization
bewildered civilization because the aim of life is simply
intoxication intoxication morning to evening intoxication
And thus it is not possible impossible to understand reality that your spirit soul
You have a real name real form real identity not possible
That is why rupa goswami says
There are various demands of the body tongue wants to speak something
Tongue wants to taste something and all the senses are desiring something do not fulfill the demands. All the demands are addictive in nature
So control control regulate do tapasya by this tapasya
Slowly our heart will become purified and we will be able to understand what is knowledge and then we follow the principles of knowledge
Then we are happy
But this knowledge is not known to people which is common sense thing common sense affair
So such kind of yajna ordinary people
About transcendental knowledge discussing vedanta understanding
It is not possible for everyone. So ordinary people they have tendency of such
Addictive enjoyments. So the vedas give a very nice way of doing it. That is called yajna
So you engage in your whatever task you want to do here in this world, but results don't enjoy completely
sacrifice
reduce your addictions just like you are then rehabilitation camp is small small dosage the
Intoxicant would be given to you. It would be reduced gradually in a similar fashion
Whatever result whatever money you are earning, please don't enjoy everything start sacrificing that is called yajna sacrifice sacrifice sacrifice
And understanding of god is not possible as we discussed as long as a person is addicted to material enjoyment
so that is why vedas very intelligently have created a system of
Sacrifice doing sacrifice for devatas demigods
We all want material desires you do satisfy you do yajna for satisfaction of chandra indra varuna
Durga shiva and they will fulfill your material desires
At least a person is submitting to some authority. He is not becoming atheist
So when he sees I have done this yajna and by this yajna I did
Put the resty again. I got putra. He will develop strong faith. Oh so nice it is this yajna works
So just like I told you before also one of our boys
he was having kidney stone and he went to a person who was doing some tantra and
The doctors told him you have to do so we have to do surgery
and everyone is scared of surgery so he went to this lady and
She was able to take out the kidney stone by chanting some mantras only that's it
And next day he went for a test and there is no stone and then he sent his other three friends also
Uh, and they also got cured the stone came out immediately by the mantras. So the lady lives in
Uh billi district still somebody wants you can visit for kidney stones
So then you develop they develop faith. Oh, this works very nicely. Just see the stone is out and it is wonderful
Uh, but then he will realize simply taking stone out has not made me happy
Let me further read. What do vedas mention about happiness?
And then one day he'll come to knowledge man. Man, I think of krishna become devotee of krishna that will give you happiness
And then he will try it and his life would be successful
in this way slowly
By doing yajnas for the devatas a person is directed towards god first
He develops faith because he sees immediately result of the vedas
Okay, I did yajna for the enemy enemy is destroyed. I did yajna for wealth wealth has come
And all these things are happening but satisfaction will not come unless a person serves god. He loves god
So then he has developed strong faith in the vedas
then he will read further the
Conclusive portion of the vedas the vedanta bhagavatam
And then he surrenders to god engages in his service and his life becomes successful
So, let us see, uh these three verses what lord krishna is describing about the vedas
And we will conclude the discussion about it
So this we discussed in the last class we have to take prasadam
Now lord krishna is telling
Anna bhavanti bhutani parjanya dana sambhava
Yajna bhavati parjanya yajna karma samudbhava
All living bodies subsist on food grains which are produced from rains
Rains are produced by performance of yajna sacrifice and yajna is born of prescribed duties
So some people tell uh, they are called naturopaths
Uh, I do not know if some of you are following please don't get offended but uh people are
Going away from the vedas and inventing some hush-push thing a little from the vedas and little my own
Imagination that is called naturopathy few portions are there from the vedas
They will tell it is very but it is not actually vedic something is their own imagination and they tell
We are unhealthy because we are not living the way nature
Has designed has is telling us to live
So I asked why I was speaking to one of the leading naturopaths of the world
So he told actually grains are not meant for us
We are not able to digest grains and because of indigestion. We are getting diseased
We are simply meant to have some vegetables some fruits like that. So I told but nature only produces grains
How you are telling we are not meant to take grains then who will eat grains nature is producing no, no grains
Will be consumed by birds. It is not for us
So I told okay
And they tell our philosophy is based on bhagavad gita. They will quote some shlokas
So if you come across any such person who tells eating grains is not natural for you
Please quote this shloka from third chapter text number 14
Anna bhavanti bhutani all living bodies subsist on grains anna lord krishna is telling
So god is telling grains. I have created for human beings
If you are not able to digest, please do some exercise or eat less eat in a proper way
But it is not that you have to leave grains every normal person a diseased person. It's a different case
He should eat grains anna bhavanti bhutani
so
Uh, these shlokas are quoted because arjuna was willing to leave his duties
So krishna tells without doing duties. You cannot do yajna without yajna. There would be no grains
Anna bhavanti bhutani living entities subsist on subsist on food grains
Food grains are produced from rains
And how rains fall?
so rains do not fall because of
as
People were believing for a very very long time you plant more trees and there would be rain
Now people don't believe on this theory
and if this is fact why there is a
there is condensation they tell because of trees there is condensation and
The clouds they fall as rains
So there's not fact because there is rainfall in the ocean also
And everywhere other places also and what we call iran and those places
2500 years ago
There was lush green vegetation in that area, but now it is desert
So if it was lush green vegetation
So all the clouds they should have attracted and rain should have fallen there. Why it is not happening. No, that is not fact
So krishna is telling here
Parjanya means rains are produced by performance of yajna
When you do yajna rain will be supplied and yajna how do we do yajna yajna is born of prescribed duties
What does it mean yajna is born of prescribed duties
so
One typical yajna which we see is that of
Fire sacrifice as we discussed putting some ingredients in the fire
So that devatas get strength
by
Whatever ghee and food grains tons and tons of ghee and food grains were required to perform a yajna
An ordinary person cannot do it even
Uh king like maharaj yudhishthir. He had to send arjun to get some money to perform yajna
It is extremely expensive affair only kings can afford to do a couple of yajnas. That's it
It is not that you sit in front of some whore some
Yajna kunda put something over it and yajna. No, it is extremely expensive affair
So
That is called dravya yajna
Offering of food grains and clarified butter into the fire and that food it is reaching the devatas
How it is reaching the devatas, how do we understand this it is going there in the fire. No, that is the science
Just like
I'm producing some sound now
It is compression rarefaction of air as science calls it
But then the sound is getting transformed into electrical signal that is getting transformed into electromagnetic waves
And in this way the sound is reaching you who are sitting
Maybe thousands of miles away
So the same sound has reached you isn't it by transformation
Although ordinarily my sound cannot reach even the other room, but now by specific procedure specific technology it is reaching you
In a similar fashion
There is a specific technology if you chant the mantras properly ignite the right fire rightly
Then the fire will carry all the fruit ingredients
transformed into a different
format to the devatas
Just like my sound is getting transformed into a different format and it is reaching you in a similar fashion. This is science
Thus the in bhagavatam you will read I think in fifth canto it is mentioned
Lord indra was somehow hiding in water for a very long time
And thus he had to starve
Because fire agni cannot enter in water and agni carries all the food grains what yajna is done
So indra had to starve all that time when he was within the water
So all these things are sciences another example is
Just like any
Book is there
So the same book just like you are seeing on the screen the scanned copy of the book
So the book has reached you although complete book is there in my hand still if I scan it
You can all the book has reached to your place also and you are also reading the book in a different format
But you are having the same effect same knowledge is reaching you
In a similar fashion, although we see the food is lying there just like the book is lying in my hand
But the food has reached the devatas in a different format
So that is why our experience of the world is very very limited when you do some research about it
So prabhupada
Many people would question that no bhagavad gita is mythology. Mahabharata is mythology
Why mythology it is a fact it is history. So prabhupada quotes this verse
annad bhavanti bhutani
all living bodies
subsist on food grains
This is mythology or reality
No, this is reality prabhupada
Yes, living bodies do subsist on food grains. So prabhupada tells yes
Just like this is fact
Similarly, if you carefully read and analyze you will understand
Every line of bhagavad gita mahabharata is a fact
Just like now the famous sinister he died
so
In the first look it appears that it happened automatically the person was not happy and then he hung himself
But by careful analysis they are telling no, it is not automatic. Somebody has done it some external agent has done it
in a similar fashion
Because our experience is limited
It may be difficult to fathom some of the statements, but if you study very very carefully you will understand every line is a fact
So this yajna which is which is called fire sacrifice it is one kind of yajna
But as we discussed in the previous class any kind of sacrifice
The highest sacrifice lord krishna mentions is yajna nam japa yajna asmi intense chapter
The greatest yajna sacrifices japa yajna chanting and hearing the names of god your tongue could have produced so many sounds
But you sacrifice that propensity and you engage tongue
In chanting the names of god
Your ears could have heard wonderful music, but you sacrifice the tendency just to hear the names of god
So this is also a sacrifice. This is also called yajna
Why rain is falling in the west in the west people do not do yajna. No, at least they are still
Following the system of marriage
Marriage is also a yajna. You sacrifice the propensity of enjoying with
Many people every other day you stick to one partner. This is sacrifice
So that you save time you gain sanity and peace of mind for
Searching the absolute truth if every day you are looking for a new partner
There is no sanity and peace in mind how you can know absolute truth and various question of happiness. So marriage is also a yajna
Similarly, you are doing your duties very nicely. You are not taking bribes. That is also yajna
You could have taken bribes and enjoyed the money, you know
So in a similar fashion yajna is born of duties if you do our duties which are mentioned in the vedas very very nicely
Then yajna is automatically involved
And one such yajna is this fire yajna, which is one format of sending food to the managers of the universal affairs
Which are controlling heat fire air vegetation and all the various affairs of this world even our bodies
Is
Regulated activities are prescribed in the vedas
So duties who will tell prabhu how to do my duties now we understood. Yes, prabhu. I want to do yajna
So for doing yajna, you have to do your duties nicely
The yajnas are automatically performed as a part of duty
So, how do I know what is my duty so duty you will get in the vedas vedas are user manual for our life
Asha so vedas give duties, but how do I put faith that vedas are giving the right thing right course of action?
So krishna mentions
brahma akshara samudbhavam
Brahma means the vedas akshara samudbhavam. They are manifested from supreme personality of godhead
So krishna is telling and vedas also mentioned up or who share vedas are not created by any human being
But they are coming from god. That is why they are perfect
Consequently all pervading transcendence god who is there present everywhere. He is eternally situated in acts of sacrifice
So god gives us vedas the vedas gives us duty
If you do your duties very nicely you will be doing yajna, which are part of our duties
By doing yajna nicely, there would be rain and supply of natural
materials minerals ingredients
And by that you will be able to maintain your body very nicely
So thus it is very very important krishna tells
To follow the cycle of yajna
And a person who is not falling
My dear arjuna man who does not follow this prescribed vedic system of sacrifice yajna
Certainly leads a life of sin
For a person delighting only in the senses lives in vain
So krishna tells arjuna
If a person has thought my aim in life is only to satisfy my mind and body
Give comforts to senses get some name fame please the mind
And so krishna tells
God is telling his life is moham moham is useless
He has wasted his life
in this human form of life if he would have done yajna
then he would have got freedom from
repeated birth and deaths and entering these machines and he would have experienced a very extraordinary spiritual happiness and he has wasted his life
So thus krishna is telling arjuna, please
Is important but
Leaving the duties taking sannyas directly to read the vedas is not recommended to everybody unless the heart is purified
So how tatvajjigyaasa you can do you work very nicely you are a kshatriya you fight but fight for doing yajna
Offer the result of activities for my satisfaction
So I want this fight to happen. So when you fight now for my satisfaction your fighting becomes yajna
Krishna
So ordinary people are supposed to perform yajna in this way
Whatever activities you are performing engage those in those activities and the results of activities a person should offer in the service of krishna
And then automatically the knowledge of truth will be revealed in the heart
So this is the process of
Performing sacrifice. This is the purpose of doing all the sacrifice
When you sacrifice automatically the knowledge about life is revealed the knowledge about god is revealed
and
When a person keeps on sacrificing just like when you sacrifice for any person
Then there is love
Between the two there is relationship in a similar fashion relationship develops with god and that relationship actually satisfies us
