So yesterday we saw it is very very important to do Jigyasa in order to solve the problems
of life. If a person is having some cough there is Jigyasa. What is the cause of my
cough? What is the problem? And then a person understands, oh it is because of some virus
then there is next Jigyasa. What is this virus? And then appropriately we have to take medicines.
So in this manner if a person does Jigyasa and he gets the answer of his Jigyasa, if
he follows that answer then he becomes happy in life. So it is very very important to do
Jigyasa and find the right answer and then become happy. Not always Jigyasa may lead
to happiness. Oh not always, abhi to aapne bola Jigyasa karna bahot zaruri hai. How do
we understand this? So we will see as we start with the session. So I am sharing the
screen here. Today we are going to see the topic Incredible Vedas. Knowledge beyond past,
present and future. Usually we talk of three things. Either there is past or there is present
or there is future. But what is this knowledge which is beyond past, present and future?
Then what is it all about? Beyond time dimension. So all these things we will understand as
our session progresses. This session is dedicated to His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada. Swami Prabhupada whom we call Srila Prabhupada is our spiritual master and
the founder Acharya of the worldwide Hare Krishna movement also known as ISKCON, the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness. So there are two main ways of getting knowledge
Jigyasa. One is called Aarohpantha which is called ascending process. And another way of getting
knowledge is called Avrohpantha which means descending knowledge. Now what does it mean?
Few hundred years ago in the 14th century just like we are having a pandemic now there was a
very great epidemic in Europe and some other Middle East I think and some other countries.
And what was this? Overnight people would develop boils on their bodies and by the morning they are
dead. Oh what is this thing? That was called plague. Very dangerous. People were not knowing
what is killing and they are trying very hard. The thought leaders of that time, the intellectuals
immediately they came forward and tried to come up with a solution. What is causing this thing?
This is not natural. Having boils on the body is not natural for us. Why this is happening? What
has caused this? So they tried to do research and then they found that it is happening because of
cats. They figured out whatever this virus, whatever it is, it is entering us because we
are associating with the cats. It is coming through cats. And so they started killing all the cats of
Europe and they killed almost all. Wherever they would find they would kill a cat. And what was the
result? The result was they actually found it is not because of cats that it is coming
but it is because of rats. And then there were no more cats to kill the rats.
So thus they brought about their own ruination. Instead of solving the epidemic they aggravated
the problem, increased the problem. And if I am not wrong 50% or 60% of the population of Europe
succumbed to this epidemic plague. So this is the danger of Jigyasa which is
not placed properly, which is not done in the right direction. So such Jigyasa can bring our own deaths.
And similar thing, what happened in 14th century in Europe, it is happening even now.
Civilization has always been there. The earth has been a very very nice place to live.
And for many many centuries people have been living here, very peacefully, very nicely.
And then suddenly few hundred years ago, around two three hundred years ago, some intellectuals
of the society came forward. And the society was going in a regular pace, same thing. Men were there,
they would do some simple things. There were no motor cars, no automobiles. They would have horse
rides, bullock rides, bullock carts were there. They would ride on elephants, camels. There were no
factories. There were no bulbs and no lights even. They would use castor oil lamps in those times.
They would use castor oil lamps in those times. And then these people came forward told no no no
this castor lamp oil is not good. We will give you very nice lamp, wonderful lamp, electric lamp,
and then you'll be very very happy. And then we'll make your life more comfortable. Such fans ACs
were not there. And they told no it is not good. We should try to become free from these laws of
nature. So they suggested wonderful solutions. And then apparently people became very happy.
Oh this is so nice. Wow. We have electric bulbs. We have automobiles. We are what not.
And then they surrendered to those people. Yeah this is practical. There's something wonderful.
But then now we see in the words of very famous scientist late Stephen Hawking. He told we have
brought ourselves to the point of no return because of industrialization. And the world is
going to be destroyed in the next hundred years maximum. The maximum time left with us is 100
years. Stephen Hawking the scientist top most scientist is telling. Why he was telling like
that? Who is going to kill us in 100 years? Is it the sabji vendor? Is it the panwala down the street
who is going to kill us? The very scientific community who told we will make you very very
happy. So life continued on this planet for many many years. But then because of certain endeavor
in order to increase that happiness. Go beyond the resources what God had has arranged for us
or had arranged for us at that time. Let us try to increase our comforts, increase our resources,
increase our happiness. What has happened is world today is more depressed than the great depression
of the world war people are telling. Depression, anxiety we saw yesterday it is continuously
increasing in society. At which level there is happiness in our life a person should ask.
Ultimately we are all working very very hard so many 20-30 years of education and job and business
whatever to become happy. But at which level has happiness increased in my life? Am I happy more
physically? The answer is no because so many diseases are coming in my body. I remember I
think I was the fourth person or fifth person or even maybe third person in my class to get specs.
So it was a not very usual thing and now we see almost every other person is having it. The
diseases which people would get at ripe old age heart attacks and all those things joint pains,
arthritis and so many other blood pressure, diabetes all these things are happening at the
age of 20 or even before that immunity has become very less. So person physically has become very
very weak. 500 years ago before this advent of modern science people were so very strong
when I went to the palace of a king in my birthplace. So it was
incredulous. I was not able to understand what is this. We saw the armor of the king and that was
very heavy around 100 kgs if I'm not mistaken. The sword was very very heavy 40-50 kgs
spear and everything was so heavy and I thought maybe these are things for just showcase you know
the kings have many many decorative items as we have our drawing rooms arranged. Similarly these
spears, these swords and all these armors are decorative items. How can a king use it? We cannot
even lift 40 kgs. What to speak of lifting in one hand a sword and fighting with it. But then I read
history and then I came across that not just this king but many many other kings. It could be Maharana
Pratap, could be Shivaji and even other warriors other people they were very very strong. A person
cannot lift even four kgs and fight with one hand and they were lifting 40 kgs 50 kgs 80 kgs
the spear of Rana Pratap. I'm not wrong it's 80 kgs. So so strong people were and so sharp were
the memories that books are not required. People were called Shruti Dharas. Once they would hear in
the school gurukuls they would keep in their mind for the rest of their lives. So physically there is
no happiness. Mentally there is no happiness. There is a lot of anxiety in our lives collectively as
a nation in the world and also individually you can see in your life whatever pursuit we are having
in our life. Is it making me physically more strong? Is it making me mentally more happy and
peaceful? What to speak of spiritual of which we have no idea at all. Family emotional happiness
no happiness. There are hardly any families. From joint it became nuclear and now nuclear
fission has happened. Electron protons have slitted across in various directions. So husband
is working, wife is working. The son is not seeing father and mother only. So no attachment, no love,
no bonding. Son, father, mother, brother, sister all in different countries or different cities.
This is life. So at which level have I increased my happiness? At every level there is more and
more stress. So despite the increase in research institute, despite tremendous increase in research
papers, this research is not making a person happy. Why? Now this is very very important to
understand. So today's session is very important. I request all of you please keep your cell phones
on mute. Please close all the parallel windows. Now do not post any questions because many questions
may be answered in course of the session. Please try to hear very very attentively. We are having
next 55 minutes together. So please start posting questions once I am done with this presentation.
So all this is happening because of Aaroh Pantha. This process of taking knowledge,
totally relying on this process. So what is this process? Why it is so wrong that it is creating
difficulties in life? The best of the scientists and brains they have brought our own ruination
and he's telling in next 100 years not sabjiwala, not panwinder, not any other thing.
Who is going to kill us? The scientific invention. He tells either some genetically modified viruses
or something it can kill us. We have many Hollywood movies based on this concept or
nuclear war can happen anytime. We can die because of nuclear war. Earth can be destroyed hundreds of
times if I'm not wrong with that. Viruses, nuclear wars or there can be
global warming he told. So who has created this global warming? Who has created these nuclear
weapons? Who is doing all these things? And then it tells finally AI, artificial intelligence.
The best brains are working in the field of artificial intelligence now.
And this artificial intelligence even the top most proponents of this technology tell it is
very very risky and very dangerous and Stephen Hawking told it is one of the top five reasons
which can bring destruction, self-destruction of this planet. So this is called paradox of life.
There is a tremendous increase to become happy but what we have got is more and more distress.
Stress is increasing like anything. As we saw yesterday US, China and India are top three
depressed nations in the world. So all this is happening because of Aarohpantha way of getting
knowledge. What is this Aarohpantha? Aaroh means to climb up. So Chaitanya Charita Amrita describes
there are four imperfections in this process.
So when you try to do Aarohpantha ascending process or in simple words
research work. So when your Jigyasa you want to solve using research work then
we come in the clutches of these four defects. Every human machine it suffers from these four
defects and the first defect is Karana Patav. Karan means senses. A patu means imperfect.
Karana Patav. Imperfect senses. What does it mean? My senses are perfect. I don't have specs.
No sir. Let us see. Visible range. We all have read in basic sciences even those who are not
from technology can understand. We can only see a limited portion of electromagnetic spectrum.
Vibhgyur. And we all have read in our science books it is 4000 to 7000 amp-strong units.
So all those people, personalities or object substances which emit or reflect light beyond
this range we will not be able to see them. We are practically blind outside this range of 4000
to 7000 angstrom units and we practically see many many things we do not see like air. It exists but
we do not see but we can at least have the touch sensation. AMFM waves we cannot even touch but
they do exist and it is told this field is reducing our life because we are living in the midst of
field. These computer devices, mobile devices, all this electric wiring, so much field is being
generated and this body's electrochemical combination and this field it is causing many
many changes in the body breaking down the cells reducing the immunity as many many people are
telling now. So AMFM waves we do not see but they are a fact. X-rays we do not see but we
understand indirectly something is taught by the bones but passes through flesh.
So there should be some energy. X-rays we do not know like this many many energies are there around
us which we can never see. So our eyes are imperfect. We should not tell if I am not able
to see something it does not exist. Anything which doesn't fall the reflection of the light
bounced on its surface within this 4000 to 7000 angstrom units we will not be able to see that
object person. Let us come to tongue. If we eat orange after sugar what would be the taste?
It would be sour and the same orange if we eat after lemon, so what would be the taste? Sweet.
Thus our tongue is relative knowledge and when we are sick then all the food tastes very bitter.
So a person can tell if he is given the task you please do research. Who is the best cook?
But no sir you are sick.
So our senses cannot give us absolute knowledge please try to understand. Similarly years are
deaf outside this range. The bats can hear ultrasonic and they fly using that frequency.
Similarly the snakes, have we heard snakes talking? The snakes also talk but at very low
frequencies. So many many conversations can be happening around us but if it is at very low
frequency we will not be able to catch it. Just like in defense they are always trying to catch
the conversations happening between the other army trying to intercept the signals. If you are
able to touch that frequency you can hear that voice. So many many conversations can be happening
but it doesn't fall in our audible frequency we will not be able to hear it. Our machine is
not designed to catch the signal beyond 20 hertz to 20 kilohertz, 20 000 hertz. So thus we should
not depend upon our senses to tell what exists and what does not exist. This is called Karana
All our senses give us relative knowledge.
So thus we can never tell what exists and what does not exist. We can see but a small thing.
Just like somebody tells so your eyes are able to see God see soul or you cannot see
your microscope also cannot see soul your telescope cannot see God then soul God all these
things do not exist. So this is your window 4000 to 7000 angstrom units maybe your devices can
see a little more but they also have windows. The radars can see much beyond the visible range
but then there are stealth bombers US is expert in making stealth bombers
your radars won't be able to detect it and a person can see oh sir there is no plane coming
no enemy plane immediately there'll be bomb on your head because that is stealth bomber
your radars cannot see it it does not mean there is no enemy plane on your top. So thus we should
never depend upon senses to tell reality. As if this defect was not sufficient there is another
defect that is called Pramad means illusion if you see here it appears the lines are tapering
narrowing down or broadening at the other end however these are all parallel lines there's
optical illusion sides of the square appear to be bent but that is not fact it's a perfect square.
Now what do we see on the screen entire screen is shaking it seems some almonds are floating in the
but if you focus on one of the almonds entire screen will become still just focus on one not
to the next it becomes still and then you see the next it's again starts moving. So Pramad means
just like this what is this phenomena of if you don't know science somebody can call pencil bending
if you put pencil in water pencil bends at certain angle however this is not fact it is called
phenomena of refraction. So it is not that pencil is bending to mundane vision it appears
this is called Pramad and this is the greatest example of Pramad this is called mirage.
Mirakrishna
there is no water in the desert but there is illusion of water in a similar fashion people
think oh life of sadhu life of a spiritualist is very dry dry there is no happiness over here
oh I have to follow so many rules and regulations I have to get up before sunrise every day
take bath two times in a day three times in a day eat very simple food regulated diet minimal diet
and curtail all the entertainment no entertainment oh my god only one dress at all times oh it is so
difficult so tough I cannot follow this how horrible life it is and life of a materialist
it appears very nice see he's so rich he's having his own chartered plane and he's having so many
bungalows in so many countries so many cars Rolls Royce and all he's having of his own so many
people give him respect he's so famous wow what a voice what a dance what steps what eloquent
speaker he is such an amazing life so the uncle of Krishna he tells this very nice analogy when
he went to see Krishna so he told in his utter humility Krishna how unfortunate I am I am like
a foolish person who misses water seeing it covered by vegetation sometimes when you go
to a water reservoir it is covered by thick vegetation and it appears these are vegetables
only on some over some mud and there is no water over here actually all those things they are
floating over water so a person misses water thinking that these are only vegetables in this
place and then he runs behind water in the desert in a similar fashion people who do not have proper
spiritual knowledge they cannot do proper jigyasa they are running behind happiness in their material
life material life there is no happiness at all only increment of stress anxiety and depression
at every step and where there is actual water we miss thinking there is no water it is only
vegetation over here so spiritualists life a devotee's life is full of bliss at every step
the bliss is increasing and life of a materialist is like a man chasing the water in the mirage
happiness he never gets so this is called pramad
so this is called the second defect which human body suffers from as if these two defects were not
sufficient there is third defect which is called bram tendency to make mistakes few months ago a
noble laureate he pulled back his research paper told there was some mistake in it and he got
Nobel Prize basis that. So after taking Nobel Prize, he's telling sorry in that research paper
there was some mistake. Similarly, when the IPCC International Panel for Climate Change, it also
got Nobel Peace Prize and the director heading that institute was Indian and he also committed
mistake and they got Nobel. He also told and he told what is my fault because the basis on which
I wrote this research paper that research paper itself was faulty. Just like we solve the questions
many times a square plus b squared is there in the question paper answer sheet. We write a cube
plus b cube and then we lose marks. That is why there is delete button on the computer
because we will commit mistakes even though we are able to see the thing very clearly 4000 to
7000 angstrom units. There is no Pramad. There is no illusion in this still. I will commit mistakes
here there is T here there is Y there is U on the keypad still I may press Y instead of U.
So there is tendency to commit mistakes. We all commit mistakes. Those who have done love
marriages will realize soon. Anyway, I am not cursing. I hope that you all take up Krishna
consciousness then whether love marriage, arranged marriage or no marriage or arranged divorce or
whatever you will be satisfied in any situation and if there is no Krishna in the life, no spiritual
knowledge, whatever you may try, there is no happiness in life. Vipralipsa. There is four
defects. I have not made a mistake. I have not committed pramad. I have not been able to do
karma. I have got the right knowledge but there is a defect called Vipralipsa. Cheating tendency.
I will not pass down this knowledge as it is. I will cheat and this tendency is inherent in us.
This tendency is inbuilt in us. Cheating tendency and there are many great frauds in the scientific
community as well and all the research scholars would be quite aware of it.
Some order that we want to publish research papers as it was in the news so much plagiarism
was happening because somehow you want to ultimately earn money. Today the researcher
also wants money. There is no quest for knowledge. Actually a person who is in pursuit of knowledge,
he will understand he will never chase this money race. They are called brahmanas in the Vedic culture
because brahmana is firmly understanding. Chanakya Pandit says one of the foremost scholars,
authorities in our country. He told any person who is following the path of knowledge,
he cannot enjoy the mundane sensual pleasures and any person who is enjoying mundane sensual
pleasures cannot rise to the platform of knowledge. Just like if you are enjoying a gulab jamun,
gross gulab jamun, you cannot enjoy gulab jamun in dream. If you are eating a gulab jamun, a sweet
in dream, you cannot eat here in your awakened state. You can choose to enjoy either of the
things. Intellectual level is different level. So a person who is seriously in pursuit of intellectual
knowledge, he cannot enjoy these mundane pleasures. So thus there is a lot of cheating which is
happening. So thus Srila Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Maharaj, Srila Prabhupada spiritual master gives
this very nice understanding. So once in a village there came a huge elephant and people had not seen
elephant. And the six blind men were given the task, you please tell what is an elephant?
How does it look like? What are its features?
The name of a spear, what you all are talking, where are you?
The name of a spear, what you all are talking, where are you?
The name of a spear, what you all are talking, where are you?
The name of a spear, what you all are talking, where are you?
The name of a spear, what you all are talking, where are you?
The name of a spear, what you all are talking, where are you?
The name of a spear, what you all are talking, where are you?
Is an elephant a form? No. What is an elephant? An elephant is an elephant.
So a blind man can never tell what is an elephant.
Similarly, Srila Bhakti Siddhanta Maharaj told, you should not limit the understanding of
transcendence. You should not limit the understanding of transcendence with the
perception of your limited senses. If we cannot see the Taj Mahal through the window, then the Taj
Mahal does not exist. Just like an elephant is too big, just to perceive the elephant,
which touch sensation, it is very very difficult. Maybe I can tell what is an onion like, what is
a carrot like, what is a radish like, I cannot tell what is an elephant like. Similarly, God is so
huge. So some people who come in contact with the energy which is emanating from the body of Lord,
so it is told, in Bhagavad Gita, Krishna tells, there is continuously light energy emanating from
the body of God, just like the sun emanates light. And some people, they tell, oh, God is actually
light, focus on the light. So many spiritual organizations, they simply focus on light.
Their aim of life is to focus on light and merge in light. It is just like a person who is holding
the trunk of an elephant or who is holding the ear of an elephant and he is telling,
elephant is actually a hand fan. No sir, simply you experience light which is emanating from the
body of God and you are telling, God is light. Oh, elephant is spear, elephant is snake, no.
When you advance further, you will understand, God is also a person, although a very great person,
simply by touching the light which is emanating from the body of God. Some people, similarly,
they analyze this universe and they tell, this universe is God. God does not have separate
existence. This universe is God. No, universe is also expansion of the body of God. Universe is
also God's energy which is coming out of the spiritual body of God. But this universe is not
complete God. So in this way, mundane philosophers and people without proper understanding, they are
trying to define what is transcendence. So what to speak of transcendence here, we have understood.
We cannot define even material sciences, material knowledge. We cannot have proper understanding.
If we base our understanding on this mundane research work, our senses are limited, very,
very limited and whatever we perceive from our senses, there is a chance of Pramad. I can be
an illusion. There is chance of Brahm. I may not be an illusion, but I will commit mistakes.
Many times there are calculation mistakes. I know how to solve this question. I commit some
calculation mistakes and then I lose marks and otherwise there is cheating also at times.
So in Darwin's theory, there is a big flaw. What is the flaw? Darwin told monkeys slowly over many,
many years. There are many flaws actually. But the main flaw is, monkey over many, many years
became a human being. So if monkey over many, many years has become a human being, the theory
is survival of the fittest. Species evolve into fitter species. So we find the fossils of monkey
and we find the fossils of man. Where is the fossil which is half monkey half man?
Where is the fossil which is 10% monkey, 90% man? Where is the fossil which is 11% monkey,
89% man? Where is fossil which is 13% monkey and 17% man? All these fossils should be there,
but we do not find so many variations of species. So where are those fossils? It is a very big
drawback and there was no evidence to support this theory. Where are the, because over millions of
years, not that monkey wake up and then he is Hrithik Roshan. He has become a human being next
day. No. Dheere dheere bandar, insaan bana boltein. Toh beech wale sare avshesh kahan par hain.
So then some scientists told yes, yes mil gaya mil gaya and they found, they brought a skull
which was half orangutan and half human being. And then it stood as an evidence for many,
many years and I think a couple of decades, 20 or 30 years. You can please check it. Pill
down man fossil for how many years it was, it was for many years. And then they found this pill down
man fossil was one of the biggest scientific frauds of the history. Actually that scientist
to become famous, to get some quick name, he picked up half portion of orangutan, half portion
of a human being skull and put some fevicol or whatever gum and glue and then he did some polish
to make it appear that it is very old and then he produced that in evidence. So it was a case of
scientific forgery. Like this many, many cases are there. So every person wants to produce some new
theory because new theory means I'll become famous if I repeat the same thing. Albert Einstein told
that universes even they commit mistake universe is static and then there was theory universe is
accelerating and then Albert Einstein considered his defeat. I was wrong. Now if you also tell
universe is accelerating, what is the use of your research? People know this. So people want to
produce new theories and sometimes even by cheating. So we can never put faith upon the mundane senses
to get knowledge. So please try to understand. Immanuel Kant told this very important thing.
We can only tell what I am perceiving. We can never tell what is reality.
Whether that is fact or not.
Bimaar aadmi ye nahi bata sakta is khaane ka actual swaad kya hai. Bimaar aadmi bolega karwa, karwa, karwa.
Swasthya aadmi bhi bolega mujhe khaane me ye swaad aara hai. Par khaane ka actual swaad kya hai,
koi nahi bata sakta. Sapne mein hum, humko lagta hai hum aadmi se baat kar rahe hain.
Toh agar koi puche aap aadmi se baat kar rahe hain kya, toh hume humesha ye bolna chahiye,
pata nahi. Mujhe asa lag raha hai ki mai baat kar raha hu, mai actually kisi se baat kar raha hu ki
nahi, you can never tell. You may be dreaming as we saw yesterday. So thus using our senses,
please understand it is very scientific and common sense understanding.
We can never tell what is reality, Emmanuel can told. You can only tell,
thus Albert Einstein told, real nature of thing we shall never know, never. You can never know
the real nature of things. You can always tell what you are perceiving. I perceive that the
universe is having this shape, that the earth is having this shape. What is actual shape? Who knows
how many dimensions we have access to? A sphere, if perceived in two dimension appears like a circle.
So living beings who are designed to just perceive two dimensions, they will give a very unique
description to a sphere. They can never conceive. Just like can we conceive a four-dimensional
object? We cannot conceive. Length, breadth, height and what? We cannot conceive it. So thus,
it is very very foolish to define reality basis our senses.
And they cannot understand the simple fact, the simple understanding that using your senses,
sir, you can only tell what you are perceiving. You can never tell what is reality. This is very
nice video. So here, if I share, it won't be of good quality. So I hope all of you have joined
the telegram channel yesterday. Those who have not joined, I will share the link in the chat
after we finish the chanting. So please join it. I'll share all these videos and other things
on that telegram channel. This very nice video gives you further understanding to
the way we perceive this world. This is very very risky process. Our senses are imperfect.
We have four defects. So we cannot be sure of what I am perceiving is reality or not,
what I am understanding it is right or not. So the conclusions may or may not be true.
So just see Vedas are so wonderful, so scientific. This is written in Chaitanya Charita Amrita.
The wonderful scripture is analyzing so nicely. Chaitanya Charita Amrita says,
it is written in Bengali. This is good and this is bad. This is all mental concoction.
So it is all illusion. This duality, this is good and this is bad. This is all illusion in our life.
How it is illusion? We will discuss in our session art of happiness. It's a very important
session. Please do not miss. One simple example we have seen here. For a pig, stool is good. For
us, stool is very very bad in taste. So this is good or this is bad, you can never tell. So that's
all the happiness that we enjoy here is illusory happiness. What is real happiness? A human being
should inquire about. So using Auro Pantha, it is very very risky process and the great brains of
today cannot understand, cannot conceive this simple common sense understanding. Why am I doing
research work? That's because of this research work. We are creating global warming. We are destroying
our planet. We have created more troubles in our life. We are spoiled air because of air pollution.
Nobody was dying two or three years ago. 25 lakh people in India died because of air pollution.
What to speak of corona? 25 lakh people they died. So this is our advancement. We are spoiled water.
There is no water. Where at 10 feet there was water, in 100 feet there is no water. In all
vegetables we have completely filled them with chemicals as come from the science chemistry.
So many nice chemicals we have manufactured. So all the vegetables are full of poison now
which were the source of life. So this is our advancement. So thus Jigyasa, if you use Jigyasa
to follow Auro Pantha, this ascending process, it is very very dangerous. So thus it is my humble
request. You can never tell what is right and what is wrong, what is good and what is bad,
basis your senses. So thus all the concepts which we have in our mind, what is good for me,
what is bad for me, what exists, what does not exist, what is reality, what is illusion,
we should take it out of our brain. Thus it is very nicely said in Srimad Bhagavatam,
It is told,
people are very much troubled. Why they are troubled? Because they do not know their
self-interest. They do not know who am I. As we understood very nicely yesterday, I am not the
body, I am spirit soul. People do not know self-interest, how to satisfy myself. I know
how to satisfy the body for a while. I know how to satisfy my eyes, my tongue but I am
dissatisfied despite satisfying my external covering. So people do not know their real
self-interest is in Vishnu, is in Vishnu, Krishna, God. Unless you re-establish your connection with
God, unless you engage in the service of God, unless you develop strong attraction and love
towards God, there is no happiness in life.
So these people, they give lot of importance to this external world and they neglect the
internal world, the soul. We are the soul inside this machine. We give lot of value to this
external world which is but temporary. And means we are living in false hope that one day I will be
very very happy. I am this body. I am man, let me have a woman. I am a woman, let me have a nice
man and I will be happy. I am this thing, let me have nice sweet, nice halwa, let me drink nicely,
let me eat meat, I will be happy. In this way we are being conditioned to perceive reality
basis our body. So in a false hope we are leading our lives that by satisfaction of mind and body
I will be satisfied. No. So why this is happening? Because blind leading the blind.
What will happen if blind will guide the blind? Blind person needs guidance to cross the road.
But if he takes guidance of blind person, what will happen? Both will die. So Bhagwatam says
this is what is happening in society.
A person who is making the material body the source of his knowledge, the material mind,
the way body has limitations, mind also has limitations. An ant cannot understand algebra,
mathematics. Charles Towns said actually people accuse the people who follow religion of having
blind faith but the people who are having who are most advanced in blind faith are the scientists.
Because they have a blind faith Charles Towns got Nobel for laser. He told because the scientists
they believe we can understand everything of this universe using our tiny brains. This is very very
wrong audacity. If an ant is so confident I will understand, I will crack IIT JEE.
What it can do? It cannot understand anything. It has no capacity. So how a human being can be so
confident his brain is sufficient to understand everything of this entire cosmos? First of all
prove that. Your brain is sufficient to understand. It is not sufficient. So thus the simple things
people do not understand because they are very much crazy driven by the desires of the body.
Thus a person is blind. He cannot understand these simple concepts. He is having blind faith
in his intelligence and creating more and more troubles in this life to the extent
those people who promise to make us happy are going to destroy the world in next 100 years.
And big big leaders they tell yes I will make you happy.
The education minister of our country he is fighting with his wife like cats and dogs they fought. He
would fight and they are changing their life partners many many times and he's having big big
degrees. What is the value? I'm not critical of anybody or this thing. A spiritualist does not
praise any person for his material qualities and he does not criticize for his material qualities
because these only pertain to dresses. If by seeing somebody's car I tell oh very nice person
I am foolish. Person is different car is different. If a person is in a good car I should not get
enamored that person is good. Similarly spiritualist does not praise at all for any person for his
gentleness for his politeness for his this thing for it. At the same time a spiritualist does not
criticize also anybody for his so-called wrong tendency of this machine. A spiritualist understands
everyone's soul completely different from this body which is helplessly acting as per its design
as per its forces. The dog is forced to bark. The cat is forced to mew. Man will be automatically
attracted to woman. Woman automatically attracted to man. We are helpless. So we are not criticizing
but we are telling sir you become happy then you propose policies. People are themselves very tied
up with these laws of nature. They are not free. So how you can make others happy. So thus it is
very very important not to depend upon my own understanding to get truth but try to approach a
person who is free from these four defects. So all this Vedic knowledge is coming not from people. It
is not the result of research work of people who are suffering from these four defects. All this
knowledge is directly given to us by the creator of the universe himself. The creator pass this
knowledge to the people who are free from these four defects. They give knowledge to their disciple
to their disciple. This is called Guru Shishya Parampara. In this way perfect knowledge about
how to have material happiness and spiritual happiness in this world is explained in the Vedas
and that passes the right path of getting knowledge that is called Avaroha Panta.
How that is right? How we can put faith? What is the proof guarantee?
All this we will understand tomorrow.
