This session is dedicated to His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, our Spiritual
Master and the Founder Acharya of Worldwide Hare Krishna Movement.
So we saw yesterday that how if a person does Jigyasa but not in a proper way, he takes
the path of Aaroha Pantha to satisfy his Jigyasa, to solve the problems of life, he can end
up creating many more problems in life as it is happening today with all of us.
As we discussed yesterday, in 100 years the top grains are telling we cannot live on this
planet.
Let us move somewhere else.
Why this has happened, because we followed the path of Aaroha Pantha, ascending process
of getting knowledge.
What is the fault in this process?
We discussed the four imperfections mentioned in the Veda, especially Shri Chaitanya Charitamrita,
Karanapata, Pramad, Dham and Viprelipsa, cheating tendency.
Just like if you have a machine, you have to make an experiment with that machine.
If that machine itself is broken, if your telescope is broken, then the result will
also be faulty.
The machine has to be perfect, then the result is perfect.
So this machine which we are using for our research work, it is defective.
And there are four imperfections or defects in this machine.
These are those four, Karanapata, Pramad, Dham and Viprelipsa.
We understood how eyes have limited, very, very limited rather, we can but see in a small
window of the wide spectrum of electromagnetic rays in which we are blind.
So we understood how so many things we cannot see, but they exist.
We see them indirectly.
Similarly, our other senses are also imperfect, the tongue is imperfect, the ears are imperfect.
They have a very, very limited range of perception.
So many, many things may not fall in the range of perception of our senses.
We saw all these examples of optical illusion.
These are all various examples of Pramad.
And the greatest Pramad is, just like a person thinks, that there is water in the desert,
but there is only sand.
Water is the very thing which is not found in desert.
In a similar fashion, in material world, people think enjoyment of senses and mind is the
only thing which is found in desert.
But in reality, it is not.
In a similar fashion, in material world, people think enjoyment of senses and mind will give
me happiness.
No, sir, that is a fault.
In material world, there is no happiness at all because Krishna has labeled all the religions.
They may differ in the details, but the foundation is same.
There is no happiness in the materialistic way of life, living a life of sense enjoyment.
So just like a person gets illusion in desert, seeing there is water, we are now in illusion
thinking I am this body.
Every night I suffer from this illusion, think that I am some body of the dreams, but we
don't realize that even when you wake up, you are still hallucinating that you are this
body.
Then there is Brahm tendency to make mistakes and there is Vipralipsa cheating tendency.
Thus a human being, we cannot rely upon for getting perfect knowledge.
First of all, his senses are limited, he gets illusion, he commits mistakes, and then he
may cheat also.
So we understood this wonderful example.
Just like an elephant, six blind men got confused in trying to perceive what is elephant without
using their eyes.
In a similar fashion, if a person tries to approach God using his material senses, he
may get confused and come up with various theories regarding God.
Just like elephant is tree, elephant is rope, snake, elephant is spear, elephant is fan,
it's a hand fan.
In this way, a person will get confused if he tries to understand God directly from his
senses.
That's why the scriptures tell us that we are very small in this universe.
It's a huge universe.
Millions and billions of galaxies are there and we saw just like an ant living in the
room, it cannot understand about what's happening in the world, about the terror attacks because
it is too small.
So we discussed the understanding of the so-called researchers.
We are not even an ant compared to the scale of the universe.
If an ant thinks, now I will defeat all the intellectuals of the world, crack the best
exam of the country, ant will not be able to do so.
Brain is not defined to reason in human capacity.
In a similar fashion, we are very, very small.
We are very small in this universe.
How can we take knowledge of the universe?
This is foolishness.
If an ant wants to do research on nuclear technology, quantum mechanics, how will an
ant come to know about all this science?
It cannot come.
So in the same way, this is called blind faith.
I have blind faith in the gray cells in my skull.
These handful of gray cells which I have, I can understand everything of this universe
using those few gray cells.
This is called blind faith.
That is why we understood Aaroh Pantha is very, very risky process because our senses
are limited, imperfect, full of defects.
We cannot be sure.
Yes, at times we can have perfect knowledge also, but we can never be sure whether what
I am perceiving is reality or illusion.
So we can never rely upon this research work, which we do using our senses and mind, which
have their limitations.
Then let us continue today.
How do we get perfect knowledge about this gigantic universe?
In India, we have to keep to the left while driving.
In US, you keep to the right while driving and you may be jailed.
Otherwise, if you understand where you are, what is truth?
What are the laws here?
So the laws vary from country to country.
So it is very important to understand what is truth?
What are the laws?
What is fact?
And if you follow those principles, we can be happy in life.
So how do we get perfect knowledge?
Research work has failed completely.
We have become hopeless.
We are seeing what is happening with this research.
Physical disease is also increasing.
Fitness has not improved.
Stress has increased in life.
Anxiety has increased.
Then how do I get perfect knowledge?
So very simple.
From the creator himself.
If we want information about a computer, the manufacturer of computer gives the best information
in the form of user manual.
Any machine comes user manual.
In a similar fashion, when this entire cosmos was created, it was created even modern science now understands.
They tell it was very small and it is expanded now.
Albert Einstein could not fathom this.
Albert Einstein was telling universe is static, but then he had to concede defeat that I am faulty.
Now they tell it was very small in size and it is expanded.
So Vedas are always telling that this universe was actually very small in size.
It has expanded and from where it has expanded?
From the body of Mahavishnu.
That explanation is also given.
So the creator can give the perfect knowledge.
He has made this universe expand.
He has produced all the living entities in it and he has given user manual.
So these Vedas what we have with us, they are nothing but the user manual for us.
If you operate a new machine without user manual, you may face a lot of difficulties.
You may spoil the machine completely and harm yourself.
So this is called Avroho pantha.
Avroho pantha means descending knowledge.
You don't need to figure out what is there on top of mountain and climb the mountain to see what is on the cliff.
One person is coming down from top of mountain, you simply ask him.
So all your effort is saved and you get perfect knowledge.
Descending process.
But the hearing must be from bona fide authority.
We cannot ask a subjeevinder, please tell me laws of mechanics.
He will not be able to do so.
You should hear the knowledge but from authority who has that knowledge.
Source of hearing should be from authorities and he should pass down without any changes.
Sometimes we experience when we are writing an examination and our competitor, he is our friend and he may ask us something.
Sometimes people tell wrong answers so that he may not score more marks than me.
Even though the person is having right knowledge, he will misguide.
So that will not work again.
You should get the knowledge from a person who knows and the person should pass down knowledge without any change.
For example, if a child wants to know who his father is, who is the father, what is the way, how can he figure out?
He cannot go for so called DNA testing.
He has to take otherwise samples of all the men in this world and then he will match his sample and test whether he is my father or not.
That is not possible.
So what is the way?
So there is only one way and that is asking the mother.
The mother will tell who the father is.
Is there any other way?
No.
Only the mother a child can approach if he doesn't know who my father is for the information.
And mother should pass down the knowledge without any change.
Then the knowledge is perfect.
And if a person has to know about grandfather, how will he know?
Again from the parampara.
The father knows the grandfather or the mother knows the grandfather.
They will pass on the information.
Great grandfather, again his son, his son, the knowledge comes.
Great grandfather some eight generations ago, who was there in the family?
So what is the way, how it can be figured out?
Will science work to figure out who was there your great grandfather eight generations ago, eighteen generations ago?
No, science will not work here.
That's not possible.
So that is why.
How do we understand?
Please try to understand.
There is only one way in parampara.
Eighteen generation man told to seventeenth generation man.
He told to see sorry.
Yeah, seven sixteenth and fifteenth and fourteenth and then first generation.
Then the knowledge comes to you in this generation.
The knowledge comes down and God is the original generator from whom all the generations have come.
So when we cannot figure out who is our great grandfather, eight generation, eighteen, twenty generations ago,
how can we understand who is the original father using any scientific work?
Simply not possible.
It's a common sense thing.
The perfect knowledge of God can be taken only from parampara.
First person produced by God.
God gave him the knowledge.
See, you have come from me.
He passed down the knowledge that you have come from me.
I have come from him.
In this way, this knowledge is passed down.
So if you want to understand who is God, understanding the knowledge in parampara in succession is the only way.
There is no other way of knowing it.
It is as simple as that.
And we have many more examples also of this method of acquiring knowledge, which we use in our day to day transactions like news.
We may not know that the bomb has got dropped in Syria, but we read from the news.
We may not know that these many people have died due to Covid in this country.
We have not gone and tested, but we see from the news.
This is called Avrohpantha.
When the time, space and senses put limitations, we take knowledge from the people who already know this is called Avrohpantha.
One plus one equal to two.
Somebody asked, ma'am, why this one plus one is two?
Why not one plus one, three?
No.
So this is called Avrohpantha.
So sometimes I remember, I would wonder what is this going on.
So when the classes would get over in the kindergarten schools, we were made to memorize tables.
Two ones are two, two twos are four, two threes are six.
So I was not understanding.
I understand two, one.
And then what is this za?
Two twos za.
What is za?
What is this word?
I have not read in English.
Three threes za, nine.
Then I understood after many, many years.
I think it was in class fifth or sixth.
I realized it is R.
Two twos are four, two threes are, it is R.
It is not za.
But we simply memorized it and then we utilized it.
And we are very fortunate that our teachers told us the right thing.
Now math is so easy.
And I would sometimes tell why they did not teach me advanced tables of 16, 17, 18, 22, 25 and all.
Math calculations would have been much faster.
So we don't question.
We simply take it.
That is called Avrohpantha.
Similarly, the Vedas were directly imparted to Lord Brahma.
This knowledge we again get in parampara.
In Srimad Bhagavatam, which is the conclusive version of all the Vedas,
when Ved Vyas was not satisfied, all the Vedas, Upanishads, Puranas, four Vedas, Mahabharata,
has come to us through Maharshi Ved Vyas.
Vyas means compiler, Veda of the Vedas.
His name is actually Krishna Vaipayana.
So when he was not satisfied after composing all the literatures,
finally he gave Bhagavatam.
This is his last work.
And the first verse mentions,
From where this knowledge is coming?
This knowledge is coming from God.
This knowledge of Bhagavatam.
This Bhagavatam is different from Bhagavad Gita.
Bhagavad Gita is ABCD of spiritual life.
That has got 700 verses, shlokas.
It can take 4-5 years to finish, just to read.
And Bhagavad Gita is small.
I mean relatively smaller book.
One take book only.
Bhagavatam is in 30 volumes.
So Bhagavatam tells that this knowledge of Vedas,
from where it is coming?
This is coming from Lord Krishna.
That is why the Vedas have been called,
Aparusheya.
No man has made it.
In front of every famous book, the author's name is written.
But the Vedas don't carry the name of the author.
They tell Vedas are coming from where?
Aparusheya, not from any human being.
Veda Narayana Sakshaat.
They are directly, they are non-different from Narayana God.
They are coming from God.
Veda Narayana Sakshaat.
And from Narayana it came to Brahma, who was his disciple.
Brahma gave to Narada, who was his disciple.
Narada Muni gave to Vedavyaas, who was his disciple, Madhvachar.
In this way, in Bhagavad Gita you will read,
In this way, this great knowledge comes down in Guru Shishya Parampara.
Thus this knowledge is coming from God.
God is the creator.
Creator has perfect knowledge about the creation.
So that knowledge we can very easily rely upon.
And without any change, the knowledge comes down in this parampara.
Thus it is told,
It is not that Bhagavad Gita was not existing 5000 years ago,
when it was spoken to Arjuna.
Just that, the original meaning got lost.
Because Sanskrit is such a wonderful language,
the original meaning, you cannot guess.
Every verse can convey 30, 40, 50 or many, many meanings also.
So that is why you have to take knowledge in parampara.
God, the original creator of Vedas,
Vedaishtha sarvaraham evu vediyo vedankrit.
Ved vid eva chaham, Krishna explains in Bhagavad Gita,
Vedankrit, I am the creator of the Vedas.
So all the Vedas are coming from Krishna.
So Krishna can explain the perfect meaning.
Krishna gives that perfect meaning to his disciple.
Disciple passes on to his disciple.
Please don't get carried away by other meanings.
What is the correct meaning of this, I am explaining to you.
Many meanings can be derived from a shloka.
Please don't get carried away by them.
That is why the guru-shrisha parampara is necessary.
Otherwise, the person will make the meaning of the earth in his own way.
60-70 meanings are coming from this shloka.
Whatever he understands, he will take that meaning.
But that was not the meaning of Bhagavan,
by telling that shloka.
So Ved Vyas Ji did not create all the Vedas.
Ved Vyas Ji has compiled all the Vedas 5000 years ago.
So Vedas give us absolute and perfect knowledge about this universe.
Okay, Lord, I have understood.
But how to put faith?
That knowledge should be taken in Avropanth.
Avropanth is the way.
Our body and mind is limited in Aro.
But how to believe that these Vedas are coming from Bhagavan.
It is possible that this too has been created by some man.
And so many doubts can come to our mind.
How can we strongly believe that this is coming from Bhagavan?
So let us see.
There are many, many reasons actually to understand.
Let me study.
Somebody can tell.
Sir, how to believe that AC Varma is a book of physics.
It is not chemistry.
Open it.
If you read it, you will understand.
People want to understand sitting at home.
Without Bhagavad Gita.
How to believe that Bhagavad Gita is right?
Whatever Bhagavad Gita is.
If you read it, you will understand.
Prabhupada says.
So Prabhupada says.
If we eat food, living entities live.
So is this fiction?
Do we not live by eating food?
And when it rains, the food gets digested by the rain.
Bhagavad Gita says.
So where is the fiction?
Where is the mythology?
When the rain water comes down,
we grow crops when it rains.
And then we live by consuming those crops, those grains.
Where is the fiction?
So Srila Prabhupada tells like this.
If you read carefully, you will understand.
Each and every Shloka, Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavatam, Vedas.
They are strong facts, solid facts.
But you have to read carefully.
Once you read it, understand it well.
In the guidance of a Guru, you will understand.
It is all fact.
So there are many, many reasons to corroborate how it is fact.
Still, we will see some strong reasons today.
First reason.
What is the source of something?
Just like if some famous scientist tells something.
That this is an atom.
What happens inside the atom?
Proton, electron, neutron.
And then the scientist will say no, no, no.
There is something inside this too.
40 subatomic particles,
mesons and quarks and all those things are present.
We will say how much is there?
What happens inside the atom?
Yes, there is proton, neutron, electron.
Where is the electron?
It is outside.
Where is the proton?
It is in the core.
Everything you will tell very nicely with complete confidence.
Has anyone of us seen proton, electron, neutron?
No, none of us have seen.
So how do we have such a strong faith in this thing?
Neither will we ever be able to see before death.
But we have a very strong faith that this happens.
Scientists say that there is a gravitational force.
There is an electromagnetic force.
There is an electromagnetic spectrum.
There is van der Waals force.
There is a weak force.
There is a strong nuclear force.
There is a cohesive force.
There is a dissive force.
All these forces are there.
Which are existing in nature.
And we believe that all these forces, all these energies are existing.
Similarly, it is said in Krishna Bhagavad Gita.
There are 8 energies in this body.
There are 8 energies in every atom.
Mind, intelligence and false ego.
These 8 energies combine together to make an atom or a universe.
The same energies are there in our body.
In an atom, in a molecule, in a planet or in the entire universe.
The principle is same.
Just like the same sunlight, water and earth.
They mix together to produce rice.
They produce wheat.
They produce fruits.
Apple, guava, banana, pomegranate in a similar fashion.
These 8 energies only combine together to make man, animals, the planet.
Everything, whatever we see around us.
So Bhagavad Gita is also describing some energies.
And our modern contemporary scientists, they also describe some energies.
So why we put faith on scientists?
Because we have faith on them.
They are intelligent people.
So thus we have to understand what is the source of this knowledge.
Whether any person next door is speaking this knowledge.
The Vedas to me know who is speaking this knowledge.
So this knowledge is coming from the seekers of truth.
As we saw in yesterday's class.
If we have to have perfect knowledge about mechanical engineering.
So who do we have to go to?
We have to go to the faculty of mechanical engineering.
Because they have dedicated their lives to understand mechanical engineering.
So in the same way, if we want to know the truth.
We have to go to them for the knowledge of the truth.
Those who have dedicated their lives to know the truth.
Who do they dedicate their lives to know the truth?
So as we discussed in the last to last session.
Our entire civilization, the Vedic civilization.
It is all about knowing truth.
So ...
There is no purpose of doing work.
But there is a purpose.
In the beginning, 25 years of doing tatva is taught in the Gurukul.
After that, if one wants to enter the Ashram of the planet.
They are allowed to do it.
But if he understands the truth, then many people do not enter.
So many people do not enter and go straight to the Sanyasavastha.
And the one who has gone to the Grihastha Ashram, even a Grihastha cannot continue to live a household life.
That is temporary concession if a person cannot control his senses.
But Panchashvordhwam, as soon as Panchashvordhwam reaches 50 years of age,
as soon as he reaches 50 years of age, he has to go to the forest.
Just like in today's age, as soon as a child becomes 4 years old, he has to take admission in school.
In a similar fashion in Vedic culture, as soon as a person crosses 50 years,
Vanam Gacchet, every respectable person has to go to jungle to again cultivate the search of truths.
So this is a civilization where people would relinquish,
they would leave all the pleasures, all the comforts of life,
just to understand what is truth, what is truth, what is truth.
An intelligent person cannot rest peacefully unless he has discovered the truth.
He will leave everything and he will search for truth.
So this is the Vedic civilization, the heart of Brahma Jigyasa, therefore now is the time to inquire.
So in this country where it is compulsory to leave your household life to go for seeking truth,
such people, they tell, they corroborate that this Veda is 100% fact.
So thus the Vedas are coming to us from the people who follow the department of truth,
who are seekers of truth. This gives us a lot of good faith.
Mechanical engineering faculty can give us the knowledge of mechanical engineering.
So the knowledge that has come out in the search of truth can give us the knowledge of truth.
One more thing, so you will say, but scientists are also searching for the truth,
they are searching for the truth. Why don't we listen to them?
So we have to understand that as far as modern science is following the Vedas, that is okay.
If there is a contradiction anywhere, then you have to see who is the reliable person among these two.
An ordinary man standing on a road is giving you knowledge and a very advanced intellectual person
is giving you knowledge about science. So we listen to intellectual person.
In a similar fashion, when we compare these two people, we quickly come to the conclusion
that what is the intelligence of a person who does not follow Veda, who does not follow spiritual
life. That person is foolish of the highest order, as we understood.
This is called blind faith.
A person who is saying something right or wrong on the basis of his brain is a blind believer.
So we cannot believe that he is a blind believer.
And the person who is strongly preaching, we should never believe that because he cannot
understand that my brain's knowledge can be wrong.
Second thing, if you do not follow spiritual life, then what will you do in life?
Okay, I agree that do not follow God, do not follow spiritual life, do not practice yoga.
So what will you do in life if you do not do all this?
You will gratify your senses, you will satisfy your senses.
So you do not even understand that your senses do not satisfy your senses.
Suppose you are very hungry after eating food, so you eat food.
And after eating food, if your hunger increases even more, will you like to eat food?
You will go crazy.
If you are hungry, you eat food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
If you eat more food, your hunger increases even more.
I cannot tell you what I am perceiving. I cannot tell you what is reality.
He is a foolish person.
We can never tell.
We can tell it appears to me as having this colour.
A colour blind person will perceive different colours from the same object.
A colour blind person will perceive different colours from the same object.
An animal will perceive different colours from the same object.
Who will tell what is the actual nature of that object?
Who will tell what is the actual nature of that object?
What is the actual colour of that object?
Nobody can tell. Our machines are designed to perceive those objects in a certain way.
Our machines are designed to perceive those objects in a certain way.
So any person who is preaching strongly this is truth, he is again foolish.
So any person who is preaching strongly this is truth, he is again foolish.
Because he is thinking what I am perceiving is reality.
Because he is thinking what I am perceiving is reality.
This is the case with modern research community.
This is the case with modern research community.
They are having blind faith, their brain can give them all knowledge,
They are having blind faith, their brain can give them all knowledge,
They are telling perception is reality
Sense gratification is aim of life.
We can never expect any wisdom from such people.
We can never expect any wisdom from such people.
On the other hand Vedic knowledge is coming from people
They can never expect any wisdom from such people.
who regulate their senses
In the scriptures, there is a principle called Arshprayog.
Arshprayog means if your Guru tells you at night that it is day,
then you will have to say, yes, it is day, it is not night.
An elephant's vision is such that even if it gets a little light
and that light remains because of the stars, because of the moon,
then even at night, it looks like day.
The design of the eyes of an elephant is like this.
An elephant cannot see less. Even at night, an elephant can see like day.
In the same way, day, night, all this depends on your senses.
For an blind person, night is night.
And for an elephant, day is day.
That is why a person depends on his Guru for knowledge.
Even if I feel it is night, but if my Guru tells me that it is day,
then I will concede that it is day.
This is called Arshprayog.
This is called, see, so scientific Vedic knowledges.
So, from such source, we are getting this Vedic knowledge.
Second, predictions.
In the Vedas, what is going to happen after 2,000, 4,000, 1 lakh years?
Very precise, very unique predictions have been made.
Those predictions, we will see now, some of them.
And result, Prabhupada tells.
Someone asked Prabhupada, how do we know what you are telling is fact?
So, Prabhupada told, because we are happy.
If a person knows how corona is happening, he has knowledge,
how to make a corona vaccine, how it will stop, then he will be happy.
So, knowledge gives us happiness.
Only ignorance causes us pain.
We don't know why the body is getting old, so old age gives us pain.
We don't know what causes death.
So, we can't stop death and we become sad.
If we have knowledge of why death is happening,
how to stop this process, then death won't happen and we won't be sad.
So, the reason for pain is only ignorance.
So, a person who doesn't have any pain,
means he has all the knowledge, as simple as that.
So, the devotees are happy.
Although we discussed yesterday,
that from a physical perspective,
a devotee, a spiritualist,
doesn't have all the resources of happiness,
he doesn't have any sources which people aspire for to become happy.
They don't have money for personal use.
They wear the same clothes every day.
They can't eat outside food.
They can only eat what is available in the temple.
They don't even stay in the family.
Ordinary people are very obsessed with these things.
They don't have any entertainment.
They don't watch movies, listen to songs,
watch cricket, sports or play.
So, they don't have any entertainment in life.
They don't eat outside food.
They don't go out.
It's a very simple, lost year life.
They have to wake up 2-3 hours before sunrise every day.
But the life is full of happiness.
And happiness is increasing every day.
This means we are in knowledge.
And no change.
If the knowledge is imperfect, it changes.
Atomic theory, atomic structure is changing.
Earlier, they used to say that the smallest indivisible particle is called atom.
Then they said, no, no, wait, there is something visible in it.
They said, yes, there are all these things in it.
And then they said, no, no, no, no.
The electron is a plumperding model.
Then they said, no, no, it is orbital theory.
Then they said, cloud electron model.
Now, there is no matter.
Matter does not exist.
After studying matter for 30 years,
finally I realized that matter does not exist.
So, Krishna always says, energy, energy, everything is energy.
Satvaguna, Rajoguna, Tamoguna.
And this is coming from Mahat Brahma, from original energy.
That is coming from Brahma, from Brahmajyoti.
So, Vedas, they never change their description.
Our medicines are created and then those medicines are banned.
Paracetamol, please don't take it, it is harmful to our health.
Ayurveda, no medicine is ever banned.
Everything is so perfect.
In our theories, Vedic theories, there is no change.
It is as it is passed on without any new addition, revised and enlarged addition.
Thus, the source is from Seekers of Truth.
There are amazing predictions.
The result is you become happy.
It means that is knowledge and there is no change.
These are four solid reasons to start our spiritual life by reading the Vedas.
And we are realizing this knowledge like Ayurveda.
So, you will say, no sir, we have faith in scientists because they create so much.
See, they have made medicines for us.
So, medicines are also with us in Ayurveda.
So, when I was there in Pilani.
So, Bits Pilani is a famous college.
And there is a nice museum in that college also, inside the campus.
So, I went there to meet the director of that Bits Museum.
So, he was a very nice man and he was a strong believer of Bhagavad Gita.
So, he told me how his faith became very, very strong in all these things.
So, when he was young and they had a camping in Pachmadi, if I am not wrong, in Madhya Pradesh.
So, when they were camping over there, these two people, director and his friend,
they went somewhere else for some purpose to explore the place.
They left the group and then they met a sadhu in that jungle.
And when they met the sadhu, they asked him, sadhu, what do you eat?
You are living alone here, there is no kitchen, what do you pick?
There is no cooking arrangement also around you.
How do you manage?
So, he told, come, I will tell you.
And then the sadhu took him to some place.
He was searching here and there, trying to find something.
And then he got some root.
He took out the root, he chopped it into pieces and then he told him, eat it.
So, he told, we are scared.
What is he feeding us?
Will he kill us?
Will he kidnap us?
And so, they told him, no, yes, yes, we will take.
First you take the piece, then we will take.
So, he took a small piece, he took few pieces and they got fed.
Nothing is happening.
So, he told them, now you eat.
They put a small piece in their mouth and chewed it a little.
So, it started producing lot of froth in their mouth.
They were scared.
What is happening?
So, they spat it out and they left that place.
They got scared.
What do we do?
They had taken just little.
And when they went to the camp, they said, it's night, it's day, it's night again.
We are not feeling hungry for two days.
And our instructors were saying, what happened to these people?
Once we skipped food.
They said, we are not feeling hungry for two or three times.
We didn't eat food for two days.
They said, what is going on?
So, then we had to tell them, actually, who did we meet?
I don't know what Sadhu fed us.
We are not feeling hungry.
The next day, all of them, we can just imagine, they went to that place and started looking for that Sadhu.
But the Sadhu had left the place.
So, this is called Ayurveda.
So, many, many wonderful things are there.
So, just like there are medicines for all the diseases.
In allopathy, medicines are limited.
Ayurveda has much more broad scope of cure.
It actually cures.
Allopathy is only just like making a puncture.
Curing the just make up, patch up work.
Ayurveda goes to the root and solves it.
So, here also, we have the same science.
Yoga, the whole world on June 21st celebrates International Yoga Day.
They are taking advantage of it.
Astronomy.
No sir, scientists made a telescope for us.
We could understand how sun moves, how moon moves, how all these things are happening.
We had all this knowledge.
That is how we have Panchang calendar.
Much before, these people have got modern calendars.
And in Panchang, 5000 years ago, all these things were also perfectly known.
The description is there in Krishna book.
At the time of eclipse, Krishna goes to Kurukshetra.
So, Vrijvasis also go to Kurukshetra because they wanted to see Krishna.
And they were knowing on this day, eclipse is going to happen.
Very precisely, you can predict when eclipse is going to happen.
And the very minute time, at this time, this moment, eclipse will start at the land.
Moon will rise, moon will set.
So, how without knowing planetary motion, you can describe.
So, Vedic, actually modern people do not know what is the position of the stars.
Vedas describe very, very nicely.
And sometimes you will find contradiction also.
But whenever you face some contradictions by reading the Vedic version of astronomical positions,
you should understand how we have got Panchang.
Precise calculation of sunrise, sunset, moonrise, moon set, eclipse, seasons and all those other things.
So, this science also was known to us.
Metallurgy was also known to people and everything through the Vedas.
If you have any doubt, Bhagavatam, which is basically spiritual science,
material science, metallurgy etc. are different scriptures.
But Bhagavatam also, third canto you read, calculation of time and basis of few things of metallurgy are very, very nicely mentioned.
So, all the departments, civil engineering, on the hills, they used to build such a big palace, water reservoir, everything used to be there.
So, how they were having this science, soil mechanics, torque calculation, everything, civil engineering also was there.
But they were taking all this from Vedas.
So, Vedas are also getting all those things, which are given to us by modern science, which can be used in science.
But Vedas have some such sciences, subtle sciences.
When Tansen would sing, the lamps would burn themselves.
This modern science has no clue what is this.
This is called science of mantra.
Modern science has science of yantra, science of machines.
Science of mantra is there in the Vedas.
Simply by chanting mantras, anything can be produced.
Now let us see the predictions.
Actually, I was flabbergasted when I came across these predictions.
Lord Buddha, 5000 years ago, Vedavyasa appeared and Bhagavatam is composed by Vedavyasa.
The instructions are discussed by God, what Krishna explained to Brahma and it got expanded.
The same instructions were given to various personalities and Vedavyasa has put together all those instructions in Shrimad Bhagavatam.
So, Bhagavatam was composed 5000 years ago by Vedavyasa.
And 5000 years ago, it is mentioned so beautifully.
After 2000 years, this wonderful personality will come.
After 3000 years, this wonderful person will come.
After 4500 years, this is what is going to happen.
Just like in 1st canto, 3rd chapter, chapter no. 24.
To bewilder the atheist.
A person by the name Buddha will come in Kalyuga.
And his mother's name will be Anjana.
Anjana Suta, he is the son of Anjana.
Where he will take birth? In Kekat province, in Gaya province of Bihar.
Bhavishyati in future.
So, very nicely it is mentioned.
In future, in Kekat, in this province, Gaya province, a person by the name Buddha will be born to Anjana.
How somebody can define so nicely?
About various dynasties, Chanakya Pandit, it is very nicely mentioned.
In 12th canto, end of Bhagavatam.
So, Bhagavatam describes, all of you should have Srimad Bhagavatam in your house.
Srimad Bhagavatam describes the universe right from the time of creation
till what is going, how Kalyuga is going to end and Satyuga is going to start again.
So, it is mentioning.
So, Parishit Maharaj is asking that our Vedic culture is so strong
because the descriptions of horrible things in Kalyuga is given.
So, horrible things cannot happen if a person follows Vedas.
So, Parishit Maharaj who was hearing Bhagavatam, he asks,
then how people who are following so nicely Vedic culture,
how these horrible things will set place?
Then Shukde Goswami tells, it is because of Nanda dynasty.
This dynasty will come from their Vedic culture, actually will start degrading.
And then he mentions,
Dhuja means Brahman,
Dhanananda and all, Nanda dynasty had 9 kings, we know from history.
The name is mentioned.
After uprooting Nanda dynasty, after removing 9 Nanda kings,
Dhuja, one Brahman will remove them.
They will rule, the rulers of Maurya dynasty, in Kalyuga.
They will definitely rule.
And what will be their name? That is also written.
Their name will be Chandragupita, as we know.
As they know, what is going to happen after 3000 years.
Kings named Chandragupita are going to come.
Their son's name will be Varisar, Varibindu, they are synonyms.
And their son's name is Ashokvardhan, Samrat Ashok, we know.
How nicely the genealogy is mentioned.
Chandragupita, then Varisar, then Ashokvardhan.
And when I read next shloka, I was even more surprised.
It tells for how many years Maurya dynasty will rule to such precision.
It can be seen by the Vedic authorities.
There will be 10 kings in Maurya dynasty.
Nirpa means kings, Dasha means 10.
And for how many years will they rule?
Sapta means 7, Trinshat means 30.
Kshat means 100, Uttara means over 100.
Over 137 years, means 137 years.
So I was incredulous.
Immediately I searched, I googled it.
Maurya dynasty rule.
And I would find that, oh it is 137 years.
So how it is so nice science.
The name of dynasty, successive dynasty.
How many kings will be there?
How many years they will rule?
What is going to be the name of the king?
Everything is mentioned very nicely.
And then Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, who is Krishna's incarnation in Kali Yuga.
Covered incarnation.
So this is from, again many many Puranas and Upanishads.
Time is very less.
Maybe I can share with you the document.
How Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's prediction is there in various Vedas.
So just see in this Vayu Puran.
So nicely it is mentioned.
After 4500 years, the exact date day is mentioned.
The month is mentioned.
The day is mentioned.
The name of father and mother is also mentioned.
Mother's name will be Shachi.
Father's name is Purandar Mishra.
So to Purandar Mishra and Shachi Mata.
Lord Gaurachandra will take birth.
On the bank of Swarnadi Ganges.
On Navadvipa, Navadvipa.
The name of Dham is mentioned.
In that Brahmin dynasty, Bhavishyami.
In future, he will take his birth.
And what will be his work?
He will give Bhakti Yuga.
When he took the form of Kapil Muni in Satyug, he gave Sankhya Yuga.
And now he gave Bhakti Yuga.
He will take Sanyas.
And what will be his name after taking Sanyas?
Krishna Chaitanya Naamadrikta.
Krishna Chaitanya Naamadrikta.
After taking Sanyas, Chaitanya Maa Prabhu got to be known as Sri Krishna Chaitanya.
How just the entire life?
What he will do?
He will take birth at which place on the bank of Ganges?
Mother's name, father's name, constellation, exact date of the month.
He will take Sanyas.
He will spread Bhakti Yuga.
His Sanyas name will be Krishna Chaitanya.
Everything is so nicely mentioned in one of the prominent Puranas, Vayu Puranas.
Nice, Darwin's theory goes to dustbin.
That things are happening by chemical evolution and combination.
How so nicely things are predicted over here.
So like this, many many things are there.
Now, yes yes, Prabhu, Samajh mein aageya.
Vedas are so good.
Ab toh mein poori Ved padlunga nahi.
Please asa mat kariye.
Agar apnea Ved padne ke liye nikleenge toh arth ka anarth ho jayega.
Kyuki ek Ved ke har shlok mein I told you every shloka conveys many many meanings.
60, 70, so many meanings it can convey.
So that is why from where Vedic knowledge has to be taken, that is also mentioned.
In Padma Purana Dasloka, which you see on the screen.
In Garg Saita and various other scriptures, it is mentioned.
Sampradayi viheenaye mantra te nishvala mataha.
Agar ap sampradayi se knowledge nahi lete hain, toh ye jo mantra hai aapka wo nishval ho jayega.
Uska koi arth nahi nikleega.
Spiritual knowledge ko spiritual person, guru se lena hai, sampradayi se lena hai.
Atha kalau bhavishyanti chatwara sampradayi na isle kaliyug mein bhavishyanti future mein chatwara.
Char sampradaye honge.
Sampradaye kya hota hai? Guru parampara jo humne dekhi.
Unka naam kya hoga school ka?
Koi bhi bol sakta haa bhai mera school hai aajao.
Saint Xavier, ye hi sampradaye hain.
Jo knowledge dega Bhagwan Krishna ka nahi.
The name is mentioned.
Shri, Brahma, Rudra aur Sanaka.
Char sampradaye.
Shri sampradaye, Brahma sampradaye, Rudra sampradaye aur Sanaka Kumar sampradaye.
Vaishnava kshiti pavana, ye Vaishnava sampradaye.
Ye hi authorized hai aur koi sampradaye authorized nahi hai.
Vaishnava kshiti pavana, jo dharti ko pavitra kar deyenge.
Chatwaraste kalau bhavya, kaliyug mein hi utkali purushuttama Jagannath Puri se ye preach karenge.
Ramanujam Sri Sri Chakra Madhvacharyam Chatur Mukha.
Shri sampradaye, aap koi bhi bol sakta hai, mai Shri sampradaye ko belong karta hu?
Nahi, koi bhi apne sampradaye ka naam Shri sampradaye nahi rak sakta.
Unme jo directors aayenge, jo strong preachers, teachers aayenge, unka naam bhi mentioned hai yaha par.
Shri sampradaye mein Ramanujacharyayenge, Tirupati Balaji Mandir Shri sampradaye mein hai wo.
Madhvacharyayenge, Chatur Mukha, Chatur Mukh Brahma ji Brahma ke sampradaye mein.
To aadmi ko prove karna padega ki, haan mere jo teacher, unke teacher hai, wo Madhvacharyaye hain.
Then he can claim I belong to that sampradaye.
Ussi tarike se Vishnu Swami Rudra sampradaye mein, Nimbarka Charya, Chatushana Kumar sampradaye mein.
Inka janam hoga. To isliye bilkul exactly ved batara hai.
Ye knowledge guru parampara se lena hai, to hamara jo sampradaye hai,
Hare Krishna movement that comes from Lord Brahma, Brahma sampradaye mein aata hai.
Madhvacharyaye hamare guru hai.
Guru matlab guru parampara mein aata hai.
Ussi tarike se Madhvacharyaye ne shishya banaya,
agla guru banaya apne shishya ko, unhone apna shishya banaya.
Issi tarike se parampara niche hote huye, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu tak aayi.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu ne bhi Brahma sampradaye chuna.
Aur phir Chaitanya Mahaprabhu ke baad, this sampradaye ko kaite hain, Gauri sampradaye.
Madhva Gauri sampradaye, to ham is sampradaye mein belong karthe hain,
jisne Chaitanya Mahaprabhu aur Madhvacharyaye aata hain.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu hamne hain par dekha ki, Bhagwan ke swayam avatar hain,
likha hua hain shastro mein.
To Chaitanya Mahaprabhu ne charo sampradaye ko summarize kar diya,
Kyuki ho Bhagwan hain, unse better knowledge koi explain nahi kar sakta.
To issi liye, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu ki parampara mein jo aadmi aara hai,
is considered to be most advanced in spiritual knowledge.
Any mantra that does not come in disclic succession is useless.
Therefore, four divine individuals will appear in the Age of Kali to found the disclic schools.
So, we have seen all these points.
To issi liye agar humko shastro ka knowledge lena hain, to kisi bhi teacher se nahi lena hain.
Keval sabse pehle koi puch raha tha guru ko paise chunne, to guru ko yahan se chunna hain,
ki guru ko humko sida ek parampara mein aana chahiye.
To unko puchna hain sabse pehle guru ko humli, guru ji kya hum jaan sakte hain ki
aapka sampradaye kaunsa hai.
Kyab shri sampradaye mein hai, laxmi ji ke sampradaye mein hai, shreemat laxmi.
Kyab brahma ji ke sampradaye mein hai, ya rudra sampradaye mein hai, ya sanakth sampradaye mein hai.
Aapki sampradaye mein aata hain.
And secondly,
kya aapke guru ne aapko order diya guru banne ke liye.
These two things are sufficient to know that our guru,
to whom we are going, is he an actual guru or not.
So Krishna has the most perfect intelligence.
He has chosen these four personalities to give knowledge down.
Now because Krishna has chosen these four personalities,
then Krishna cannot make a mistake in giving knowledge to the wrong person.
These four personalities are perfect.
They are free from all defects.
So these four personalities can choose from perfection.
Who among my disciples is perfect,
who can pass this knowledge down without any change?
Then the next perfect person comes.
Because that person is perfect.
One perfect person can choose the other perfect person with his perfect intelligence.
In this way, the guru-student tradition comes.
It is the tradition of perfect people.
And in this tradition, we get this knowledge of Shastra.
Sir, but why don't scientists read Vedas?
You say, okay, we accept it.
But intellectuals should also have faith in this thing.
If this thing is so logical, then again,
partial knowledge has been given about these things.
All the big scientists who have done fundamental research,
all were very, very great scholars of the Vedas.
It could be scientists or philosophers.
We will see some instances here.
Walter says, I am convinced that
whatever we are learning now has come from Ganga.
Astrology, astronomy,
whatever subjects we are reading now,
everything.
It is very important to note that
2500 years ago, we read Pythagoras theorem in Maths.
So we say, Pythagoras,
then we didn't have flights.
Pythagoras 2500 years ago,
from Europe,
why would he come to India in India?
If the reputation of Brahmin science here
is not so famous in Europe,
then 2500 years ago,
the science of Brahmins here was so famous.
Walter says,
France is one of the most powerful
advanced nations and economies.
So why would a French national
say that the other country,
which is a poor country,
we have everything from there.
Our people have taken all the knowledge from there.
Pythagoras has also taken the knowledge from there.
Why would Walter say that?
A French national.
He is not a devotee of Sanatana Dharma.
There is no connection.
But any intelligent person will tell that.
The same Pythagoras theorem
has been told in our Vedas
in the name of Shulbasutra.
Rope formula.
If they promote it, then we call it Pythagoras theorem.
Otherwise Shulbasutra is already with us.
Heisenberg.
The second scientific revolution
was created in the early 19th century
by these quantum physicists.
Bohr, Heisenberg, Erwin Schrodinger.
And you would be surprised to know
all of them were
ardent readers of
Vedas, Upanishads and Vedanta.
So he tells, after
reading this Indian philosophy,
some of the ideas of
quantum physics that had seemed so crazy
suddenly made more sense.
Quantum theory will not look
ridiculous to people who have read Vedanta.
So he has knowledge of Vedanta.
Heisenberg, Schrodinger.
The unity and continuity of Vedanta
reflected in unity and continuity of wave mechanics.
Schrodinger tells
unity of Vedanta is reflected in
unity of wave mechanics.
And he is quoting this shloka.
Fourth last line from bottom.
This is you.
I am this entire world.
As we know is what the Brahmins,
wise men or priests express in the
sacred mystical formula.
He has read the formula also.
He has read the Vedic aphorisms also.
Just see how advanced he is in knowledge
of the Vedas and Vedanta.
My view of the world, this is proper reference.
Not that somebody has created.
He appreciates the mantras and science of
Vedas practiced by Brahmins.
Niels Bohr.
I go into the Upanishads to ask questions.
Niels Bohr goes to the Upanishads.
He was going to Upanishads to ask
questions. Nikola Tesla,
one of the persons
who commanded maximum respect in
scientific community, died early
and they tell that he was as
bright as Albert Einstein.
He is also a wonderful
scholar of the Vedas.
Just see Nikola Tesla, Bohr,
Schrodinger, Heisenberg.
All of these people are reading
Vedas, Vedanta.
Similarly, very famous mathematician
Alfred North Whitehead.
He is telling that the
advanced science
is now closer to
Vedanta.
Today's knowledge cannot
transcend the buddhi of rishis in ancient
India.
The knowledge of rishis in ancient India
cannot be passed by today's science.
We are just getting closer to them.
So why would a British mathematician
praise
a subjugated nation
of so-called country's knowledge?
He was not so-called devotee
of our community.
But he is telling this.
And if you read Oppenheimer,
there is I think video also.
Oppenheimer was heading
that group of
scientists or that
organization with
tested nuclear bomb.
Immediately after test, he quoted
the Bhagavad Gita, 10th chapter.
Mrityu sarva haras chaham.
Just see. I wonder how many of
the people today they know even
Manchaloka Bhagavad Gita.
And he has memorized it. He is quoting
Mrityu sarva haras chaham, Oppenheimer.
So all of these great scientists,
they are ardent scholars, readers
of Vedas Bhagavad Gita. Albert Einstein
was reading Bhagavad Gita. He told
when I read Bhagavad
Gita, everything else seems
so superfluous. Similarly,
Henry David Thoreau, American philosopher,
he is telling in the morning
I read, I bathe my intellect in
this philosophy of Bhagavad Gita.
Uske samne saara modern sahitye
ekdum insignificant lakta hai.
So kyu ek American Indian advanced
nation ek third world country ki taayif karega
literature ki. Because it is having fact.
Koi bhi aadmi agar
ek neutral perspective se parne ki
koshish karega, he'll be spell bound.
Kyu humko humare books mein nahi bataya jaata
ki saare scientists bhi Ved aur Vedanta
padthe hain. Toh agar aap
religious hain, aap spiritual
hain, toh aapko Ved, Bhagavad Gita
Bhagavatam padna chahiye. Agar aap
scientific hain toh bhi padna chahiye because
jo abhi ka revolution hum dekh rahe hain
laptop computer jino ne shuru kiya
wo sabhi ke sabhi quantum physicists
they were urgent reader of the Vedas and Vedanta
toh agar aap scientific bhi nahi hain
aur aap aadhyatmik bhi nahi hain
tabhi aap vedon ko neglect
neglect kar sakte hain, avoid kar sakte hain
otherwise they cannot avoid. So it is my humble
request. There are many many
evidences. It is coming from people
who have dedicated their life to find truth
any person who is opposing this philosophy
is that simply you observe his life
he is sense gratifier. He is having
blind faith on his brain. He does not
understand sense gratification only
makes me more and more dissatisfied. Why
to listen to such foolish person? So it is
my humble request. So Vedas
are perfect knowledge.
Such perfect knowledge.
So Vedas give us
answers to fundamental questions
Who am I? Where have I come from?
Ye body machine hain, kahan se aaga hai
is body mein? Aur purpose kya
hai? Har machine ka purpose hota hai?
Toh purpose kya is creation ke peeche?
Adani, aurat, kutta,
billi, bhin, bakri, machli
ye kya chal raha hai?
Sabke peeche kya purpose hai?
Mrittu ke baadam kahan jayenge? Who is God?
So these are things which are very
important. Pere purpose ho samjo jeevan ka
tab jeevan jeena shuru karo?
Samjo kaun bana raha hai, kyun bana raha hai?
This is called human enquiry.
So because these are very important questions
we cannot avoid reading the Vedas.
So it is my humble request.
We will share the books in sequence.
Amne book share ki aafse telegram channel pe
so please us book ko parna shuru kari
I will share some more books
and then you can start Bhagavad Gita, eventually
Bhagavatam, Jaitanya Chaitanya Tamrita
and other scriptures.
Aur Hare Krishna Maha Mantra har roz
jab karna zaroori hai, wo jab karenge, toh
ye Vedo ko bahut easily samajh paye.
With this I would end today's session.
