We will understand today the Karma Cafe or the Laws of Karma.
The session is dedicated to His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
Swami Prabhupada is our Spiritual Master and the Founder Acharya of the worldwide Hare Krishna Movement.
Srishti Sthiti Pralaya Sadhana Shaktireka Chaye Vayasya Bhuvanani Bivarti Durga
Ichchanu Rupam Apiyasya Chachestatesa Govindam Adi Purusham Tamaham Bhajami
So here we see Goddess Durga on the screen.
So Goddess Durga, she is having ten hands.
So this material world is called Durg.
What is Durg?
Durg means a fort or a prison.
It is very difficult to come in or go out.
A person cannot cross the boundary fence very very easily.
So thus this place is called Durg material world.
A person cannot very easily leave the process of birth and death and the miseries which are being inflicted in this world.
And because this world is called Durg, the in-charge of this world is called Durga.
One who is in charge of this fort, nobody can escape this place very easily.
So Durga has got ten hands.
What do these ten hands signify?
They signify ten directions East, West, North, South in between subdirections 8 then up and down.
These are ten directions.
So a living entity can escape in either of these ten directions.
There is no living direction.
So ten hands signify in whichever direction you want to run in order to escape the miseries of life.
Durga will catch you from one of her hands.
And then Durga has a trident in her hand with which she is piercing the heart of demons.
So what does this trident signify?
This trident signifies three kinds of miseries.
Only three?
Prabhu, life mein dukhye dukhye aap sirf teen miseries ki kaise baat kar rahe hain?
Yes, life mein baah saara dukh hai.
Life mein paise ki kami hain.
Life mein name, fame ki kami hain.
Life mein comforts, luxuries ki kami hain.
Life mein achha khaane ki kami hain.
Achha peene ki kami hain.
Achha soni ki kami hain.
Neem nahi aati hain.
Life mein achhe job ki kami hain.
Achche business ki kami hain.
Achche government ki kami hain.
Achche systems ki kami hain.
Achche products ki kami hain.
Achche weather ki kami hain.
So much, so many difficulties we are fraught with every day in our life.
But all these miseries can be classified into three categories as per the Vedas.
Iske alawa koi chaothi category nahi hain.
Vedas are very wonderful in the analysis of the world being as we saw in the second and third class
because the Vedas are word of supreme creator himself.
So he tells there are three miseries only, no fourth misery.
Which are the three miseries?
This is the first misery.
What is this?
Adhyatmik misery.
Atmika.
Atmika, atma means self.
Self means body, mind, intelligence and soul.
So when my mind and body or intellect, they create problems that is called adhyatmik misery.
Sometimes a person is very much disturbed because of some physical inconveniences or mental inconvenience.
This misery is called adhyatmik misery.
Sometimes our mind and body is not giving us trouble but other people are there to give us ample trouble in life.
This is called adhibhautik misery.
So somebody told a very nice joke.
Sai was hearing one of the doctors of some alternate therapy.
So he was telling that people do not understand what is good and what is bad.
So he gave the example that people in some religion, they tell that if you do nice work and do this thing like that,
then you will go to heaven and in heaven you will get 72 or whatever number of foods, very beautiful angels, angelic girls.
And people become very inspired by such decree.
Oh, wow, my life would be so nice.
So let me do this task. Let me die. Let me do this thing.
And I'll be enjoying anyway.
Getting one or two women is difficult.
Let me go there and enjoy with 72 angelic women.
And then he told, but these people don't realize it is boon or bane.
Ek hoor yahaan pa tolerate nahi ho rahi hai. 72 hoor ko kaise tolerate karenge.
So the misery is created by other living entities.
Other living entity could be your family member.
It could be any insect or snake or any other animals.
It could be boss. It could be subordinate.
Any other living entity, man, human or non-human species, that is called adhibhautik misery.
Bhuta means living entities.
So there are miseries caused by our mind and body, miseries caused by other minds and bodies.
And then there is one more category.
And that is any guesses.
Final category. We have had a dose of it.
Now this is adhidhautik misery.
Adhidhautik means supernatural powers.
It is not created by my mind and body or other living entities.
It is created by supernatural powers.
Epidemics, pandemic, which we are having now hurricanes, tornadoes, tsunamis, earthquakes,
volcanoes, floods, all these things are called adhidhautik misery.
So just now this pandemic we have.
So it is not caused by any living entity.
It is not caused by us, but by the arrangement of nature.
We are suffering because of this extreme weather.
It is very, very hot. It is very, very cold.
Sometimes when we call people for classes, please come.
Why are you not coming?
Oh, probably it is very hot now.
How do I come? How do I manage going out of room?
I cannot understand.
Please come after some time.
Then we ask why you're not coming.
Probably it is raining very heavily.
How do I come?
Okay, come later.
So why you are not coming now?
Probably it is too cold now.
When the winter reduces, then I'll come.
So always we are fought with various anxieties.
So there is very nice story in this connection.
So there was once a very nice disciple of a Brahmana.
And he was going on a pilgrimage, his teacher.
And he told, I'm going on a pilgrimage.
I'll come back after some time.
And those days there were no flights and planes.
These days we have flight trips.
You go in one day, you reach any place and come back.
So people would go on foot or people would take some cards or animals.
It would take a very, very long time.
Usually they would walk. They would go on foot.
So walking, it may take many, many months.
They will tour all the places.
It may take many, many years.
They may not even come back.
So he told, so I'm going.
Meanwhile, what do you do?
Before I come back, you should have finished the study of Bhagavad Gita.
He told, oh Master, thank you very much for giving me an order.
I will definitely finish Bhagavad Gita before you are back.
And then the Master went on for pilgrimage.
And the disciple started studying Bhagavad Gita very nicely.
So the Master said, Bhagavad Gita, you have to finish before my Dham Yatra.
The disciple started studying very nicely.
And everything was fine.
He was studying peacefully.
There was a small hut.
But there was a difficulty.
What is that difficulty?
One small rat was coming and it was punching hole in the dhoti of the Brahmachari.
Now Brahmachari became disturbed.
What is this?
This rat is coming. It is disturbing me.
Spoiling my clothes.
So, okay, small problem.
Let me fix it.
It won't take much endeavor to fix.
So how do I solve the rat problem?
He thought, yeah, good idea.
Let me have a cat.
If cat is there, cat would chase the rat away.
And then I will read Bhagavad Gita very, very peacefully.
No difficulty would be there.
So Brahmachari brought the cat.
The cat was chewing.
Because of the cat, the rat was not coming.
Brahmachari told, wow, now my problem is solved.
Now I will read Bhagavad Gita very, very nicely.
Then cat started.
Because obviously you have to feed the cat.
Cat started demanding for milk.
Give me something to eat, drink.
And now Brahmachari thought, oh, I could not figure out this.
Cat needs to be given milk to sustain.
So how do I get milk now?
Okay, let me have a cow.
So I'll have a cow.
Cow will give milk.
Milk I'll feed the cat with.
And then cat will chase away the rat.
Then I will read Bhagavad Gita very, very peacefully.
So then he brought a cow.
And then he understood, oh, it is very hectic to take care of a cow.
Then he thought, what to do now?
Somebody should be there to take care of cow.
So he thought, okay, yeah, after Brahmachari,
yeah, grahastha is a bona fide ashram.
Let me become a grahastha.
I'll marry.
Get a wife.
Wife will take care of cow.
Cow will feed the cat.
Cat will chase the rat.
And I'll read Bhagavad Gita very, very peacefully.
And then he got married.
And then everything was happening very nicely.
Wife was taking care of the cow.
Was taking care of the cat.
Was taking care of the rat.
And everything was nice.
And before he could read much of Bhagavad Gita,
wife started asking, you're not paying attention to me.
You're married.
You have some responsibility.
You should fulfill my demands also.
Okay, please tell me what is your demand?
What do you want?
She told, obviously, we have married.
I want children.
Give me some children.
So Brahmachari told, okay, I'll give you some children.
What is there?
So then some children also came into picture.
Now he has to take care of children.
Then he had to make a big house.
And then he had to do some business to take care of the children.
And the house grew bigger.
It transformed.
Entire thing transformed into a different setup.
And then suddenly the master comes back from the pilgrimage.
And after returning from the pilgrimage,
the master comes to his hut and says,
I haven't forgotten the way.
I can see a big house here.
A palace-like house.
Children are running around here.
Cows and goats are here.
What is all this?
I haven't come to the wrong place.
So then his disciple comes out and says,
What have you done here?
I told you to read Bhagavad Gita.
So he says, yes master,
So the miseries of this world a person can never solve.
So if you think, okay, one fine day the things would settle up
and then I will become peaceful or I will read Bhagavad Gita,
no sir, peace is not going to come in this material world.
Krishna has labelled this world as
In Bhagavad Gita, Krishna writes,
Anityam Asukham Lokam.
This is Asukham Lok.
There is no happiness here.
So some people say,
when we preach,
please come and understand Bhagavad Gita,
the disciples ask,
But some people tell, I am not in stress, I am happy.
So Prabhupada told, he is a mad man.
Because a creator is telling,
there is no happiness in this world
and if he is feeling that I am happy,
And one person goes and says,
Look, there are so many intellectuals here,
they are having such a good discussion.
So he is mad.
If someone thinks he is mad or intellectual.
In a similar fashion,
this material world has been labelled
Dukh Alayam.
This is the house of sorrow.
There is no happiness here.
If a person is feeling happy here
or is expecting that one day I will be happy.
If my two numbers come out well,
then I will be happy.
If I get a little job,
then I will be happy.
If my friend gets a good job,
if I get a promotion,
if I switch jobs,
then I will be happy.
If my boyfriend or girlfriend gets married,
then I will be happy.
If I get a divorce,
then I will be happy.
If my kids get married,
then I will be happy.
If my kids get married,
then I will be happy.
In this way,
a person keeps on calculating.
But happiness never comes here.
So a person may keep on waiting,
but this world has been labelled.
So there are three miseries.
And a person is constantly being pierced by the miseries.
So just like we were discussing the other day,
as soon as we fall sick,
we immediately approach a doctor.
That why am I suffering?
Similarly, when we see these three miseries,
I should immediately approach a person of knowledge.
Why am I suffering?
But this response is not so easy.
So when people are fraught with these sufferings,
they elicit three responses.
It is unique.
It varies as per the consciousness of the person.
First response is the rabbit response.
What is the rabbit response?
Tamsik.
Tamsik means mode of ignorance.
Our bodies and our minds are surcharged with three energies.
Satvaguna, Rajaguna and Tamaguna.
When a person is very, very Tamsik,
what is a Tamsik person?
Tamsik person means person would be very, very lazy.
He would be dull.
He would be dirty.
He would be slow.
So these kind of people or animals,
they are mainly in Tamaguna.
What kind of response do they have
when they are faced with these problems?
Just like a rabbit.
As soon as there is a tiger chasing rabbit,
the rabbit thinks, so I cannot escape now.
Tiger has come in front of me.
I'm going to die.
So the rabbit closes its eyes in fear or tiger.
And then similarly, ostrich also does like that.
Ostrich puts its head in the sand.
And then it thinks, so tiger is gone.
But that is foolishness.
Simply by closing the eyes, the problem is not solved.
So the enjoyment which people have now,
they may go to bars and pubs.
As soon as there is Saturday night,
you would see many, many people here.
We see many, many youngsters.
Saturday night, they would be roaming on the streets
and have a nightlife.
They would drink very nicely.
So all these people visiting restaurants or movies
or pubs, bars, they want to forget the miseries of life.
So this is called tamasik response.
They have not solved the misery.
But one day they want to enjoy.
They want to forget that there is some misery in life.
Again, Monday, I have to go back to office.
So this forgetfulness is called tamasik.
Oh, let me sleep.
Let me keep on sleeping.
Let me postpone.
Let me do this thing.
There is another set of people who are little advanced.
They don't just ignore the miseries,
but they do very hard work to solve the problems of life.
That is called rajasik response.
Rajogun means mode of passion.
Person is very, very passionate.
Just like to give you a typical example.
Some people on this world when they see,
oh, global warming is happening.
This thing is happening.
Some people are not worried at all.
Oh, polythene.
Let me use polythene.
Some people are telling, we don't care about it.
And there are some people who are rajasik, very passionate.
Oh, this world is going to be destroyed in 100 years.
What do I do?
What do I do?
I will fight.
I will not surrender to these problems.
We will go to another planet.
We will go to moon and Mars.
But this person does not understand.
So a person who is tamasik, he is fully mad.
He is totally in ignorance.
And the person is rajasik, he is called half mad.
When a person is passionate,
desires of his senses are very, very strong.
Then such a person becomes half mad.
So this person knows what is happening in the world,
but he cannot think properly because of so much of passion.
So a person does not have common sense to think that on this planet,
which is full of resources,
which has got very nice air, water and vegetables
and very nice ozone layer, very nice symbiotic system,
all the arrangements, civilization has persisted here.
For thousands of years, civilization has been going on here.
I cannot save that place in the next 100 years
by using all my science.
And I am saying, let's go on a journey to Mars.
We will go to Mars and make a jungle.
Scientists nowadays say that they will make a jungle in Mars.
They say, first save this jungle and then make a jungle in Mars.
But this sense doesn't strike people.
This is called madness.
Just see, it is common sense.
A planet which is full of resources,
you can only destroy it with your science.
Stephen Hawking is saying that in 100 years,
this planet will not survive, we will destroy it.
Either with global warming, nuclear war,
or genetically produced viruses,
or with artificial intelligence,
or with nuclear war, we will destroy this planet.
We have destroyed ourselves with industrialization.
And using the same science we are telling,
we cannot save this planet, but we can create life there.
How great cheating it is.
This man is cheating himself and the world.
And the world is so royal,
that they do not understand the simple concepts of life.
By working hard, they think they can solve the problems of life.
So this is a royal response.
Foolishness.
So a Tamsic person, there is no happiness in his life.
He is just closing his eyes.
He is still in that misery.
He still has pain and tension,
but after drinking, he forgets what is misery in life.
He keeps sleeping, he forgets that he has to scold the teacher again,
he has to scold the husband's wife again,
he has to see this again, he has to reply to the boss's mail again.
He wants to forget, keep on sleeping.
There is no happiness in his life,
neither beginning nor end, he is escaping.
Bhagavad Gita says that a royal person,
immediately gets some pleasure,
but in the long term, he only gets misery.
So human life is meant to elevate ourselves to Satvaguna.
Unless a person is Satvik, what is Satvik?
Satvik means
A person's mind is under control.
Senses are under control.
Who teaches to control the senses these days?
Parents think that whatever the child says,
give it to the child immediately.
Give more if you want more, it will make the child happy.
But it doesn't make them happy.
That's why children in America are sad.
Why are they sad?
They say that vitamin N is lacking there.
What vitamin is vitamin N?
So let me tell you, vitamin N means
hearing no in life.
There is all richness and opulence.
Even unemployed people, I think they get $100
if people from US are hearing.
So unemployment allowance is so much you can live
entire life without doing any job.
So there parents,
they thought because teenagers,
children are coming under depression.
Why they are coming under depression?
Because whatever the child asks,
the parents, they give him immediately.
Or let my child not worry at all.
But when the child grew up,
now the world is not like that.
Whatever you ask, it will happen.
Whatever success you want in life, you will get it.
No, it is not like that.
So they were living
in an illusory concept of life.
Whatever they asked, parents would bring them and give them.
So they thought the world is like this.
Whatever you demand, you will get immediately.
And when they don't get, they are not able to tolerate
the failure in their life.
Thus they come under depression.
So now they are telling, even though you have resources,
three out of four times,
I don't remember exactly the ratio,
if I am not wrong, they told like this,
you should tell no to your child.
Telling your child no is very important
to build a realistic concept
of this world that your demands
will not be fulfilled so that
he can expect such failures in life
and he can tolerate such failures when they come.
So anyway, so this is called Saathvik.
So some people can understand
and they are on the mental level.
So on mental level, you would have heard
various self-help book, Power of Subconscious Mind
or the Power of Now
and so many books
on mental level, self-affirmation
and all these things. I am peaceful.
So a person who is Saathvik,
he is able to be thoughtful
and then he tries
to solve the miseries
by thinking, finding out the solution.
And when he advances further
in Satvugana, he understands
that all the problems of life
can be solved by self-realization.
He understands firmly that
I am not the body. He understands
when I am sleeping, then all
the problems of this world do not bother me.
Why they don't bother me? Because I don't
remember anything of this material world.
So sometimes
when I am sleeping, even though it is
very, very hot, I am sweating, but
I don't feel the heat because
I am not conscious of this body.
So I am not the body
and if I practically am able to realize
that I am different from the body,
then whatever is happening at the physical level,
it will not disturb me.
If I understand I am not the mind,
whatever is happening at the mental level, it will not disturb me.
So he understands
self-realization, understanding,
realizing I am different from the body,
it will solve all my problems of life.
So all the Vedic training
was given so that person can slowly
come to Satvugana. And when
a person is surcharged with Satvik energy,
automatically the forces
of destiny do not act upon him.
The more we increase Satvugana
in our life, the more we get freedom
to act. Tamasic person is helpless.
Sometimes we feel helpless
in our life. Always we are
being forced, like that
always helpless, he cannot change his habit.
That means lot of Tamuguna is
there in life. And when a person is
very much driven by sensual desires,
that means he is Rajasekha, Rajoguna is
there in the body. And Satvik person
he can experience freedom in life.
The more Satvuguna increases in life,
the force of destiny
acts less powerfully, the nature acts
less powerfully upon the person.
And then after Satvuguna, a person
can transcend to devotional
platform, should the Satvuguna.
So all the Vedic civilization get up early in
the morning before Brahmurta.
In Brahmachari life, control your mind and
senses very very nicely. Eat
only Satvik foodstuffs, don't eat
anything which is cooked after
it is
immediately, within three hours you have to consume
it. After that it becomes Tamasic,
don't do it. So people were knowing
all these things very very nicely.
So when we are surcharged with Satvik energy,
a person is automatically very very happy,
peaceful and thoughtful.
And such a thoughtful person can understand
the Vedas.
So why this is very very important
shloka from Srimad Bhagavatam.
We think that
these miseries are
happening because of the instruments.
So
I am suffering in this country because the
government is not good. So somehow
if I can create some revolution and throw
away the government, then
I will be happy. But we practically
see people are now
more distressed than what they were
in pre-independence era.
More money has gone out of the country
than what Britishers took.
So the change of government has not
made people happier in our country.
So there is lot of stress within the
same country, two partitions, three, four
partitions have happened and they are fighting with each
other and trying to put money,
all the money in creating bombs.
So just see
very simple understanding.
So Srila Prabhupada when he went
to visit Bhakti Siddhanta Maharaj
and Srila Prabhupada told
his spiritual master Bhakti Siddhanta Maharaj
in their first meeting.
So Prabhupada told, yes your message is
very nice. Bhakti Siddhanta Maharaj
was very very strong preacher.
Although the entire country was
rigged up to throw the Britishers away in
pre-independence era, he was preaching
Krishna consciousness very very vigorously
and Srila Bhakti Siddhanta
Maharaj had sixty thousand
devotees, disciples with him.
Just imagine at that time an army
he had, without any communication
he was managing sixty four centers in the
country and some abroad. So Bhakti
Siddhanta Maharaj was rigorously, he was not
caring about change of government,
but he was preaching Krishna consciousness.
So he told Prabhupada, this temporary
change of government will not
bring any happiness to people.
So the urgency is this Krishna
consciousness. Shrimad Bhagavatam
mentions, when people
become irreligious, they commit
sins, then a wrong government
is put into place by Krishna so that
they can be punished for their sins.
So nothing happens by chance
in the world. So that is what has
happened in the country we see.
Even though we have thrown away the Britishers
but the country has become
more under, more stressed,
more depressed and more
plundering, more torture,
more all these things are happening in the
country. So we should not think I am suffering because of
government. Similarly we should
not think I am suffering because of my life
partner or my life partner is not good.
We should not think I am suffering
because of my children.
They don't listen to me, we should not think I am suffering
because of my parents. They are crazy, they
keep on telling me something else, something weird.
We should not think I am suffering because
of my neighbor, we should not think
I am suffering because of XYZ
All these problems are
It is mentioned very nicely in this shloka. Please hear carefully.
ye na yavan yatha dharmo dharma veha samihitaha
sa eva tat phalam bhungte tatha tavad mutra vai
shreemad bhagvatam chataskan 1.45 shloka
ye na yavan yatha dharmo dharma veha samihitaha
ye na yavan jo bhi jis matra mein jis prakar se yatha
adharma dharma
dharma ya adharma karta hai
prakriti ke niyamo ka palan karta hai
ya phir unko disobey karta hai
sa eva tat phalam bhungte usko vaisa phal bhogna hi prata hai
tatha ussi proportion mein ussi prakar se
kap bhogna prata hai?
amutra vai, amutra matlab bhavishya mein agle janam mein
is jivan mein nahi
to jis prakar se aadme dharma ya adharma karta hai
uska agla janam decide hota hai
bhavishya decide hota hai
to abhi jo humare jivan mein samajh se aa rahi hai
parishani aa rahi hai
all the miseries which we have in our life now
that is because of our past life
punar janam ka prabhav hai
in previous life I gave lot of charity as a person
will have lot of money in this life
previous life if he helped somebody in this life
he will get help automatically
if you give respect to others you will get respect automatically
in this way the laws of nature work
just like here also it happens
if you kill somebody you will not be hanged immediately
agar humare haato se kisi ka murder ho jaye
to kuch samay lagega
court mein case chalega
may be 2 saal, 5 saal, 10 saal, 20 saal, 30 saal mein uska result aata hai
agar hum exam bhi dete hain uska result aata hai
phir hum job karte hain, phir salary milti hain
to jis thare se is material world main action
aur reaction ke beech mein time hota hai
bhagwan humko ek janam ka time dete hain
agar aap se koi galti ho gayi hain
to aap usko please correct kar lijiye
isko kaiten prayashchit
agar aap se yeh galti ho gayi hain
to aapko itne brahmano ko bhojan karana hain
yeh galti ho gayi hain aapko jaake
teerth mein aise aise puja karne hain
aap se yeh galti ho gayi hain
iska yeh upchaar hain
usko kaiten prayashchit
to parishit maharaj ne jaf suna
shukde guswami se ki narak mein itni yatnai
jhel nahi padti hain
the hellish situation is so difficult
he immediately ask please how they can be saved
so shukde guswami son of vedavyasa
you are sitting he is sitting on the throne
jo asana pe baite hain
wo vedavyasa ke bete hain shukde guswami
toh unhone bataya
atonement prayashchit karna padega
toh ek janam ka samay diya jata hain
agar aap prayashchit kar sakkein
janam mein toh aapko nahi bhogna padega
toh jo manusmriti hain
jo pehle humare saare laws se
wo bhagwan ke law ko prayashchit ko
follow karte the
agar humare haato se kisi ka murder ho jaaye
toh uska prayashchit hai ki humko marna padega
agar aisa nahi hota hai toh
ghor yaatana jhelni padegi agle jeevan mein
iska gyaan logon ko abhi nahi hain
so people think why do you give capital punishment
please give some time
so that a person may be reformed
this life is the only thing we can have to enjoy
so leave him in 15-20 years of punishment
no sir
if a person is killer if you don't kill him
there is no other atonement he has to be killed
so we are enjoying or suffering
because of actions of previous life
toh please aisa mat sochiye
by working very hard
you will become happy
so person who is rajasik by hard work
immediately gets some happiness
but he creates lot of misery in the future
the example is given
just like we are put into prison
by your hard work you can jump the fence
but police will again catch you
and your term of punishment
will extend
and more time you have to spend in jail
you will get beating also
maybe you will be put into dark cell
if you do such mischief
that is why a person who is rajasik
immediately is able to solve
apparently some problems are fly by hard work
but all those hard working people
they become more miserable
just like the famous
Chinese billionaire who I think
retired some time ago
one of the richest persons of the world
so he told
I am not more happy now
rather I was much more happier
than when I was earning just some
I think he quoted some 12 dollars
he was a school teacher or college teacher
so he was doing a simple teacher job
and earning some 12 dollars
and now he is a billionaire
one of the richest of the world
and he is having 12 billion
or how many dollars
and he is telling I am not more happy
rather I was more happy
so it came in the news
so what is the use of having so much of money
when after getting all that money
the famous person he is telling I am not more happy
by hard work
you can analyze in your life
you are simply becoming more and more stressful
hard work does not solve
hard work is never
recommended in the Vedic literature
hard work simply increases
the problems of life
foolish people, industrialists, motivators
they are simply cheating the entire society
by telling by working very hard
you will become very very happy
Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita
person does not work very hard
somehow or the other
he is always satisfied
such a person is very very dear to me
Krishna is telling who should we listen to
God or these foolish people
who themselves are not satisfied in their life
and by hard work what will happen
see people do not have common sense to understand
I have a big car
so other person also
hard work they are doing for what
if a person has more money
can he eat 1000 chapatis
can he eat 1000 gulab jamuns or sweets
he cannot do that
can he sleep on a bed which is 100 by 100 feet wide
no for sleeping
you just need that small space
so you cannot enjoy more eating
more sleeping
I am earning 100 dollars I will sleep for 100 hours
continuously is it possible
no you cannot enjoy more eating
you cannot enjoy more mating
you cannot enjoy more sleeping
you cannot enjoy anything more
but by this hard work what will happen
you will exploit mother nature
if you have 5 cars
another person will work very hard
he will have 6 cars and show to the world
another person will have 7 cars
by which what is happening
we are exploiting this mother nature
and killing our own children
future generations
so all these hard working people
who work very hard
people are teaching everyone to work hard
if you are working hard you are killing your children
you are killing this earth
you are killing future generations
you cannot have
are we doing this hard work for God
just to show greed
before doing God
knowledge is important
before acting as a benefactor
you need to have knowledge what is good and what is bad
and this knowledge is not coming from imagination
the way we need to know laws
why this person is being punished
why he is being jailed
lawyer will tell you
Indian Penal Code this law he has broken
similarly scholars tell us
what is good and what is bad
people are suffering in this ignorance
this was the new religion
so please try to understand
the happiness and sorrow of this life has been fixed
we cannot change it
instruments can be separated
like before if a person committed a sin
they would put him in front of a crocodile
another person would be
put to be trampled under the feet of elephant
some people would be thrown
in front of hungry tigers
so he should not think
if a tiger or crocodile is a cause of my misery
I have broken the law
so king has put me these are only instruments
of my suffering
in a similar fashion I can have a bad
family member
I can have a bad boss
or bad subordinate
or bad government or bad XYZ
but they are simply instruments
because I have acted impiously in previous lives
so I am suffering now in this life
this is called destiny
as per our activities of previous lives
our education
our intelligence
our health
our beauty
these things are fixed
the breathing cycles we are going to have
that is fixed and our cause of death
that is also fixed
so Adharma, bad activities
lead to misery in life
and Dharma, good activities lead to
happiness in life
ok lord you have told us good things
in this life we have lost everything
now what to do?
let us work in a very pious way now
so that we can be happy in next life
so again Bhagwatam mentions
please don't go for Adharma
at the same time
don't go for Dharma also
we should not do bad things
we should not do good things
so here Bhagwatam is telling
...
...
...
...
...
...
so a person who is intelligent
Narad Muni is telling to Ved Vyas
...
...
there are many planets over this earth
there are many planets below this earth
so do not aspire
do not plan to go to moon
or mars or any planet
here it is being told we are very much aspiring
to go to different planets
there is life on every planet
and there are many many unimaginable
comforts present on higher planets
so in Vedic culture
people were preparing to go to higher planets
just like we prepare to go to
different countries
so Narad Muni is telling an intelligent person
does not aspire for any happiness
of this world
down from the lowermost planet Patal
the planet where Brahma, the creator of the universe lives
why?
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
All of us are endeavouring just for happiness and distress happens automatically. Similarly, happiness also will come automatically. There is no need to work hard for happiness.
Very logical.
Very logical.
No, Prabhu, I don't understand.
Sadness can come automatically, but we have to work hard for happiness.
They have carried on in their journey of this mortal world. So are we crying because of that? We are not crying, but somebody would be crying. Who would be crying?
Their family members who were happy in their association. Now they are distressed in their disassociation.
So thus happiness and distress are two sides of the same coin.
If you want to enjoy the happiness of a person's association, that person will go, or you will go. The material world is temporary.
And whether you go away from that person or that person goes away from you, you will be sad.
The greatest pleasure in the material world is when a young man and woman have an affair.
And what is the biggest cause of suicide? Same loving affairs.
Happiness and distress are two sides of the same coin.
Eating food is very enjoyable. When is it enjoyable? When you suffer from hunger.
You suffer from hunger. If you don't suffer from hunger in your body, then you won't enjoy eating food.
Prabhupada gives an example. In summer, the water feels very good. In winter, this water will give you pain.
In winter, the sun is very nice, very pleasant. And in summer, the same sun will be the cause of misery.
So there is nothing called absolute misery or happiness in this world.
As soon as you touch happiness, you should be scared. My God, I have touched distress also.
Another side of happiness is distress in this world.
So thus Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita,
na teshu ramate budha. Intelligent person does not desire material happiness at all.
Material happiness se darta hai aadmi. Oh my God!
If I aspire for material happiness, if I touch material happiness, immediately there is one misery waiting for me.
That we can very clearly see. Now you take misery, work very hard.
So future you'll get a good job and you can avoid the misery.
Now if you play all day, then you will not get a good job and then later you will suffer.
But you have to suffer. You can suffer in the beginning or at the end.
So thus happiness and suffering are two sides of the same coin.
So just like distress is coming on its own without hard work, the other side of distress,
happiness is also coming automatically on its own.
There is no need to work hard. So only foolish people, they work hard for material happiness.
Happiness which pertains to enjoyment of senses and mind.
So what is the solution? So Krishna tells, apart from good and bad activities, karma and akarma,
there is another activity. Krishna tells, akarmanascha bodhavyam ghanakarmano gati.
We should not do good activities. We should not do bad. Good and bad, both are illusory activities.
You may choose to suffer in ordinary circumstance or in opulent circumstances.
But suffering is always there. So Krishna tells, we have to do third kind of activity, that is akarma.
Akarma is activity which does not give good or bad material reaction.
That activity is activity done in comparison to other activities.
That is akarma. Akarma is activity which does not give good or bad material reaction.
That activity is activity done in complete surrender to Krishna.
Krishna has a plan for this material world. When I work for the company of Krishna,
simply execute Krishna's order, work for Krishna's pleasure, God's pleasure, that is called akarma.
Such activities do not bring any material reaction.
So that is what Krishna summarizes in. There is not 8.6, I'm sorry, it is 18.66 last chapter.
So now Krishna gives great hope. So as per our activities, some results are fixed.
That is called destiny. So just like if I have killed somebody, nobody can save me.
The police, the judge, the advocate who have given me punishment, they also cannot save me.
There is one way if I write application to precedent in a similar fashion by working hard,
you cannot solve the miseries of life or increase happiness.
Happiness and distress will come automatically, whatever is destined for us.
But there is one way of changing, writing application to God, supreme precedent.
That is what Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita.
Sarva dharmaan parityajya. Krishna is not saying, leave out the adharmas.
Krishna is saying, leave out all the dharmas. Adharmas are common sense.
Arjun, leave out all the dharmas. So Krishna says to Arjun before the shloka,
Arjun, now I am going to give you very secret knowledge.
What is that secret knowledge? People think I should do dharma in this life.
Krishna is telling, no. Sarva dharmaan.
Sare dharmaan ko bhi chhodo. Sare duties ko bhi chhodo.
Parityajya. All these duties are meant to elevate you to the final duty.
That is maa me. Kam sharanam vraja. I am your eternal relative.
Please love me. Surrender unto me. Obey my instructions.
Just like a father tells child, you will suffer.
You do not know what the world is. Follow my instructions.
So Krishna is telling maa me. Kam, please surrender unto me.
I only love you. Aham tvam sarva pape bhyo moksha ishyami.
I will free you from all the past sinful activities of the past.
So thus if we have to avoid the miseries of the past life,
there is only one solution and that is sarva dharmaan parityajya.
Forget everything, whatever we have created in our mind, good or bad.
And maam ekam. Ekam means only unto me you surrender.
Take exclusive shelter of Krishna. Surrender completely.
Whatever Krishna explains in Bhagavad Gita, follow without exception in complete surrenderence.
And then we can change our destiny.
Thus if you approach the famous astrologer of our country,
if you tell him you are Krishna's devotee, he will not see your hands.
He will tell on Krishna's devotee astrology does not work.
Because Krishna's devotee, they are beyond the laws of nature.
So, Prabhu, how do we understand this?
What is the proof that as per karma I am going to suffer or going to enjoy?
So there are various proofs we understand that we are not the body.
So body is a machine. Nothing happens by chance.
We are all sons of Krishna. Why Krishna would be partial?
Krishna tells I am equal. Samu hamsar bhuteshu.
When Krishna is equal to all living entity and some of his children are enjoying, others are suffering,
it means Krishna is impartial. But still there are disparities.
That is because of my karma as simple as that.
God is equal because all our children of God still there is disparity because of the action of the children.
This is one proof. Another understanding is we are fortunate to have taken birth in India.
You can visit various astrologers just like our Suresh was telling.
I don't know if he is hearing now.
So he told that he went to what is that temple Kanchipuram, Chidambaram.
So there if you go, Agastya Rishi, if I remember correctly, he told me
it is he who has composed various manuscripts written on leaves
and he has predicted the past life and future also of the person.
And if you go there simply you have to give.
So there are various ways by which a person's future can be told
either by the time at which he has taken birth.
But there in those temple, they simply take the thumb impression of the person.
And if you give your thumb impression, they have a unique
that leaf on which your future is mentioned written for you.
So that person will take out.
Sometimes they have to try because there could be some difficulty in understanding.
So he told when I went there, they searched through some 20, 30 leaves
and then they found out the leaf in which the name of his parents also was mentioned.
So he was shocked how somebody can tell the name of my parents.
But he was little doubtful because it took some 20, 30 tries to get his leaf.
His friend went and I think he got it in the second hit itself.
The second leaf they took out was belonging to his friend
and the name of his father and mother of this life is mentioned.
He has never been to that temple, but his father's name, mother's name is mentioned.
What was he what he was in past life, it is mentioned.
Future what is going to happen, it is mentioned.
And then he was telling Suresh.
So he's not a sentimental person, very intelligent.
He is from IIT and I am Ahmedabad, one of the best profiles.
He does not put blind faith in anything.
Before he came to Krishna consciousness, he finished all the Western philosophies.
So he told that I was not very conscious about the results.
But then I saw whatever was predicted about my future has actually happened
without consciously endeavouring, putting efforts to that and to that direction.
Similarly, my cousin, he told me he visited one astrologer who makes kundalis and all.
So when he went to meet him, he told up.
And he was not very faithful in all these things.
He told why he is told like that.
And in next two days, something struck him here and then blood started coming out.
So what is this? Looking at my face, he was able to tell.
So these are various things of astrology.
There are calculations. So things are fixed.
And as we saw in Bhagavatam also in Incredible Vedas, things are fixed.
Ashoka dynasty is going to come.
Maurya dynasty is going to come. Ashoka will come.
His son will be Chandragupta will come. His son will be Varisahara.
His son will be Ashoka.
They will rule for 137 years.
Then Lord Chaitanya, everything is fixed.
So there are fine laws operating here.
So please try to understand. Becoming happy is very, very simple.
Don't work very hard. Yes, hard work for Krishna is very good.
We work very hard in our business in our office so that we can offer the result of our work to Krishna.
We become great karma yogi Bhakti yogi.
That is very nice.
But working hard for self enjoyment that only creates more misery.
So I humbly request you all try to put all your logic.
If it is your first session, you may be skeptical about it.
But please keep hearing. Keep reading Bhagavad Gita.
Come to Satvaguna.
Easiest way to come to Satvaguna is always chanting the names of Krishna and all your doubts will be vanquished.
So please surrender to Krishna completely.
We surrender to so many people.
We surrender to our teachers.
We surrender to our boss every day.
So what is the difficulty in surrendering to Krishna?
So please follow him and see how your life transforms.
So with this, we will end and we can take a couple of questions.
Please don't spam it with many, many questions.
Please wait for getting the answers.
We will arrange so that all your questions are answered in course of time.
If we shouldn't do hard work, does this mean a person sitting for an examination should not work hard?
Yes, hard work is never recommended.
Regulated work is required for clearing examination or clearing anything in life.
Hard work. What does it mean?
Working so hard that you forget the basic spiritual duties that we have in life.
So if our spiritual duties are taken care, then balance time we can put in studies very, very nicely.
If we should not aspire for materialistic things, should we all be sannyasis leaving everything?
That is also not correct for everyone.
As you said earlier, we all should be sannyasis, but sannyasi does not mean dress.
Satnyas, one who is living with truth, he is called a sannyasi.
So Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna was willing to become sannyasi immediately.
And Arjuna's understanding of sannyas was, I don't want to fight, I want to go away.
Then Krishna explained to him what is real sannyasi.
So that definition is given. So Bhagavad Gita is so fantastic. Please read.
God has given instruction. Why don't we read?
Krishna explains,
A person who does not aspire or wants to enjoy the results of his activities.
He works in this consciousness. He is a sannyasi actually.
So when a person, usually people work so that they can enjoy the result of their work,
enjoy the money, name, fame from their work.
But when a person wants to offer these things to Krishna, he is called sannyasi.
So all of us should be sannyasi. So a person is working in factory, he is sannyasi.
An IT engineer is a sannyasi. A sabji vendor is a sannyasi.
And a person in this dress is also a sannyasi.
Sannyasi means who works only for the satisfaction of Krishna.
And we should all be sannyasi without satisfying God who is our eternal relative.
We can never be satisfied. However, we can continue our profession.
Arjuna continued fighting and he remained a fighter sannyasi.
This is actual understanding of sannyas.
So whatever work you are doing, please do but offer the results to Krishna.
How we assume or understand Krishna's order in our materialistic activities.
What is the order of Krishna in job?
This order we get from spiritual master who is always seeing Krishna face to face.
If everything is fixed, how we decide anything is Krishna consciousness also fixed.
I told everything is not fixed.
Many things are just like as soon as you enter a college, then your degree is fixed.
Now, which branch you are going to take in India, of course, branch is also fixed.
In West, you can choose the branch in second year.
And then once you have chosen the branch, which job you are going to have, it is not fixed.
But once you have once you have cracked an interview, you chose to start for that company's interview,
then your job is also fixed in this way.
As per your activities, few things are fixed.
Few are not fixed.
And Krishna consciousness is not at all fixed in spiritual life.
It all depends upon your sincerity, your aspiration, your enthusiasm.
You can perfect in one moment also.
