So today's session is the principles of freedom. Session is dedicated to His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, our spiritual master and the founder Acharya of the worldwide Hare Krishna movement.
So far we have studied various concepts. We understood how we are not the body, we are spirit soul and then we understood how Vedic knowledge is so perfect and so important
and inseparable from our existence if you want to become happy, how it is bona fide, how all the sciences, rather advanced sciences are mentioned in the Vedas.
But after all these concepts, there is time to have something practically which we can implement in our life.
So far I am very happy to hear we got some feedback that many of you have started chanting regularly.
2 rounds, 4 rounds, 10 rounds and very new people have come to that level even 16 rounds. So I am very glad to hear that.
So chanting and reading Srila Prabhupada books, that is what we have implemented.
Now there are few more important things. These are definitely important. Chanting is most important.
But there are many many other things which are required to make the process quick and perfect. Which are those things we will understand now.
So society is becoming more and more permissive now. Few things which were unimaginable and it was considered a great breach in what is considered good as per the norms of society.
It is very very acceptable now. Everything is being allowed. People tell everything is okay. There is nothing like right and wrong. Everything is okay.
Right and wrong depends upon time, place and circumstances. So let us come out of this conservative behavior and let us be liberal.
Whatever a person wants, whatever a child wants, he should be allowed to do. That is freedom.
Let the person not suffer. Just like many people also tell these days.
So please follow your passion. Whatever you are passionate about, you think I should do it, you go for it. Whatever we want, we should be allowed to do that.
So why should there be any restriction everywhere as soon as there is restriction?
So we were discussing sometimes people are going to so many places but so much interest is not there in spiritual life.
So there was some restriction in one of the temples of our country that women cannot go of certain age group.
And then they all started revolting. Why is this not there? We will go to temple. And then all of them started going to temple.
So I thought this is a nice strategy. If you tell people do something, they will not do.
You tell people you are not allowed to do this. Then they would like to do that.
So that is why Kalyuga is called age of quarrel and hypocrisy.
So we are leading a life of hypocrisy that we all know how much stress is there in our life.
But our DP on Facebook, on Instagram or elsewhere, our stories, they are always nice. We are enjoying. Everything is good.
And I've seen cases where a person has put up a very nice DP and next day he has committed suicide.
So very difficult. This person is expressing to the world that he is enjoying.
So she'll probably part tells a nice story. So there was a circus in a village.
Nowadays, we don't see much of circus because of we have internet and so many restrictions upon the use of animals.
But circus was a thing very much in vogue sometime back.
So when the circus came to the village and it was very special circus, such was the promotion and ticket was very expensive.
So the people brought the ticket. But there is a restriction.
What will happen? You will get entry one by one. This is a special circus.
So the person who got first inside, when he goes, he doesn't see anything inside.
He is not able to figure out circus has started or not. I have purchased this ticket, costly ticket.
So what is happening? So then he finds some person. I have come here to see. You want to see circus? Yes, yes, please come.
Then they take that person inside and then they catch him and then beat him nicely with bamboo sticks.
And then they leave him. So this person thinks that this is a mistake.
I got beaten up in the circus. Now what will I tell to other villagers?
I have been cheated. I spent this money and then I got beating. They did not allow me to see circus also.
So let me not do this. So when people start asking, oh, you saw the circus. How was the circus?
Oh, it was very nice. Fantastic. It was amazing thing. You should also go.
So a second person goes when he goes inside. Same thing is done to him also. He's also beaten black and blue inside.
And he also thinks, oh, that person said that the circus is very nice.
I was cheated. Some goons caught me and they beat me very nicely.
No, no, let me not tell anyone. Otherwise people will laugh at me.
Then he goes side. How was it? Oh, he said that the circus is very nice. You also see.
So like this, everyone was taken inside and they were given nice beating.
And everyone is telling that everyone is thinking only I have got the beating. Otherwise all have enjoyed nice circus.
That is what is happening in this world. People think, oh, my neighbor is so happy.
Just see he has got nice car. He's in nice position. He's having nice children.
He's having nice, nice wife or she's having nice husband. See, they are so happy.
So flourishing, loving family. See on Instagram, on Facebook, how nicely they're advancing in life.
But they don't know nobody is happy here. But people are scared. No, no, they want to show off.
Everything is nice. People think there's something wrong with my life. Let me try to fix it.
No, without engaging ourselves in the loving devotional service of Krishna, there is no question of happiness.
So people ask, so why should there be restriction in society? We do not want it.
We want freedom. Why should be there an institution like marriage which restricts a man to associate only with one woman?
So every person wants to enjoy with many, many partners. But this thing is very bad.
A lot of restriction is there. We don't want we want freedom. Why should it certain food items only?
It happens in the country. So restriction is and when you restrict them, they will eat all the more.
So there are some people who are, of course, sometimes people go to extreme also.
They started killing people. You touch cow and we will kill you.
So it is not good to eat any animal. What to speak of cow, which is very, very important.
But as soon as you restrict, immediately people would do that. That is how it happens over here.
So people challenge. Oh, you are restricting. I should not eat beef.
So many people started eating beef and they are putting pictures on the newspaper, on the media.
See, we are eating beef. Do whatever you want. So why this thing is there? Why is there restriction?
People are trying to revolt. So I was thinking this is very nice. So stop people.
Now we should plan something. Now nobody is allowed in India to study Bhagavad Gita.
Maybe they will revolt and study Bhagavad Gita. This is how it is in Kali Yuga today.
So age of quarrel and hypocrisy. So there is hypocrisy.
Every person is telling that I am happy, but he is not happy and quarrel.
Everyone is quarreling, fighting with another person.
So sometimes if we are not so advanced, we may also think, oh, this is right.
Why restriction? Why this thing should be there? This is some some old people, some old thoughts.
Now we are advanced. Just see how the big nations, they are advancing. They don't have much restrictions.
But we have to understand by using common sense.
These restrictions, many such restrictions, they exist around us and we follow very, very happily,
let alone those mentioned in the religious scriptures or other places in the culture, in the customs.
So very nice example. So there are only two kinds of people existing on this planet.
There is no third category, which are the two kinds.
First kind, they live in the jail and the second kind, they live outside the jail.
There is no other thing. Either some people are living in the prison house.
There are some others who are living outside. Now among the two who is free.
Now somebody can tell, yes, obviously, the person who is not in jail, he is free.
But that is not fact. The person who is in the jail, he is obviously not free.
And just like we, we are not in the jail, but are we completely, absolutely free?
No, we are not free. There is friction. If you are flying kite on the roof, somebody will tell.
The parents would tell, no, no, do not fly like kite on the roof.
You are playing somebody's playing cricket computer game all day.
Can he be allowed to play all day? He will not be allowed to do so.
Or for that matter, traffic signals. If I want to drive continuously without stopping, will I be allowed to do that?
No, that is not possible. Similarly, there are speeding limits.
You cannot speed more on the street.
Shall we be allowed to go without without any restriction on speed?
No, you should wear helmets. You should have so many other things.
So why all these restrictions are there?
So we have to understand just like a sick person, a healthy man can eat anything.
There is no problem. But if a person is sick for his benefit,
the rules and regulations are required, very much required.
And that is required for his benefit and others benefit also.
So just like now we are restricted. So why this restriction is there?
There is lockdown. We cannot go out.
Somebody can tell what harm I am doing.
So let me go outside. You know, what is there?
Well, you know, if somebody's infected, he should not infect others for others benefit.
And for our benefit also, if you are healthy, if you go outside, we will get infected.
So in a similar fashion, Krishna has designed this world very, very nicely.
And he has given us Vedas.
So if you want to enjoy in this world, there are some rules and regulations.
If you follow, then you will not increase your miseries in the course of enjoyment
because you do not have complete knowledge about this world.
Just like a person can when he drinks, he gets immediately very nice pleasure.
He gets the feeling I'm not the body, but the same drink will create chaos and misery in his life.
And he can hit somebody while driving.
And he may abuse his family members, his friends and whatnot can happen.
So that is why it is told no after eight o'clock.
It is not allowed if you want to drink also.
And you cannot drink and dry. So so many regulations are put.
So these regulations are important for the benefit of people in general
and for the one who is following also,
because we do not have complete understanding of how this world works.
That is why sometimes we start quarreling and questioning that why this nonsensical regulation is there.
However, no regulation is nonsense.
Everything makes perfect sense, provided we have sufficient knowledge.
So just like a sick person, sick person cannot be given freedom.
A person who is having diabetes.
So if he wants, no, no, I want to eat nice paratha today.
I want to drink milk.
Now, if you drink milk, if he eats Ghee, Paratha, heavy things, he will die.
A jaundiced person should refrain from these things in a similar fashion.
Now, all of us, all the living entities in material world, they are suffering from a disease.
So the diseases that we see around us, some viral infections, some flu, malaria, dengue, tuberculosis, hepatitis or cancer or whatever diseases we have.
Actually, these are not diseases, just like when a person is having some, let's say he's got malaria.
So he may exhibit some symptoms along with malaria.
And what are the symptoms?
He can exhibit shivers in his body and he will have high temperature.
So actually, his problem is not high temperature and shivers.
That is not the disease.
The disease is malaria.
If you try to bring his temperature down only by bringing by giving him a blanket or something, so that will not solve his problem.
These are symptoms.
So we have to go and treat the root of the symptoms in a similar fashion.
Whatever diseases we have, actually malaria, jaundice, TB, etc.
Corona. These are also not diseases.
These are symptoms.
So what is the disease?
The disease the Vedas mentioned is Bhava Rog.
So this material world is called Bhava Sagar.
Bhava means to become here.
Continuously person is becoming something.
The baby is becoming young.
Young is becoming old.
Old is becoming dead.
And he's taking another life form.
Man is becoming animal.
Animal is becoming fish.
Fish is becoming reptile or X, Y, Z.
In this way, bird, bees, trees, we are continuously changing these things.
And this situation is very, very miserable because you have to die over and over again.
You have to become old again and again.
You have to have so many diseases.
So these diseases, death and all the sufferings that we have,
it is only because of the disease called Bhava Rog.
Bhava Rog means becoming something, the bodily concept of life.
The soul thinks I am this body and then he gets trapped in the illusion.
Oh, I am becoming this. I am becoming that.
So the purpose of this human form of life is liberation from this concept that I am this body.
Actually, we are not affected from disease.
It is superficial.
We are thinking I am the body and the body is undergoing transformation.
So as soon as we realize a person may be very much worried when he's sleeping
that Robert has attacked me in dream and he's chasing me.
He's going to kill me, stab me with his knife.
But then I wake up to realize that is a dream going on.
So in a similar fashion, all the problems, we need not solve the problems individually.
Oh, I am having this disease. Let me find the vaccine.
Let me find the cure.
Oh, this is a problem.
This company is not good.
Let me change the company.
Find another job in this way.
Problems are unlimited and all the problems can be solved in one go.
And that is simply by self-awakening, realizing that you are not the body.
I am the body, bodily concept of life.
This is our disease.
So human life is meant to solve this disease.
Understand, sir, ma'am, you are not the body.
You are neither.
Sir, you are not ma'am.
You are pure spirit soul, spiritual identity.
So to help a person reach this end, the Vedas describe systematic process.
So there are nine stages in our cure to make a person's life perfect.
So first step is called Aadav Shraddha.
Some people tell, how do I know that I'm advancing in spiritual life?
No, just like here we have degrees.
You have got higher secondary school degree, secondary certificate,
and then you have B.Tech degree or M.Tech degree and PhD and like that in a similar fashion.
There are steps of spiritual advancement.
So the spiritual life starts with first step and that is called Aadav Shraddha.
Aadav Shraddha means a person has little faith or little inclination that let me go and understand.
It makes little sense.
What is this thing?
What are these people doing?
So why do these people, they do this chant, this mantra, something.
They wear some tilak and they follow something.
Why do they follow that?
So some inquisitiveness is there.
Some faith is there that is called Shraddha, little faith.
And then second stage is Sadhusangha.
When a person develops little faith, then he starts associating with the devotees.
So this devotee association is very, very important.
So it is like sitting in a railway coach.
Suppose you want to go to Delhi and train is going there.
You may sit in any coach of the train and once you are inside the train, you can do anything.
You may sleep, you may be awake, you can read, you can sing, you can dance or you can run.
But if you are there in the train, you will reach the destination.
In a similar fashion, simply if you maintain devotee association throughout our life,
gradually automatically we will reach perfection.
So this devotee association is so powerful.
So this is second stage, devotee association.
Without associating with devotees, it is very difficult to understand the Vedas,
very difficult to understand spiritual science and advance in spiritual life.
And whatever little faith we have, that also will go away.
So this is second stage.
A person starts meeting, listening to devotees, living with devotees.
That is called Sadhusangha.
And then starts third stage.
What is third stage?
That is called Bhajan Kriya.
Just like many of you started hearing and then developed some interest.
And then association, daily association is happening for past many days.
And many of you have picked up Bhajan Kriya also.
That is devotional service.
A person starts following the regulative principles nicely.
He's chanting every day, he's reading every day and following other things.
So Bhajan Kriya. Bhajan means following the spiritual practices.
And then comes fourth stage.
So when you are following the spiritual practices, which is like medicine for curing Bhavarog,
then the symptoms of a disease, they start mitigating.
And that is called Anarthanivritti.
That is fourth stage.
And this stage is very difficult and it can take many, many lives also.
So what is this Anarthanivritti? Why it is so difficult? What happens here?
So ultimately, we have to understand what will happen when I'll become liberated,
when I'll come out of all these things.
So human life is meant for liberation.
We want freedom that everyone understands.
But the illusion is people are thinking they are getting free,
but actually they're getting more and more entangled.
Now people think I'm very free.
Whenever I wish, I can watch a TV series.
I can watch a movie.
I can watch anything.
I can eat anywhere.
I can just order on Swiggy Zomato and the thing will come to my place.
But sir, what is happening?
You are not getting free.
You are getting entangled.
So now a person is addicted every Friday, every Saturday, every day.
He wants to eat something from outside.
Now if he does not eat, he will get disturbed.
Now a person wants to see movie every day.
If he does not see, he'll get disturbed.
But movies always existing.
What that particular movie existing before a cricket match is happening.
World Cup. Oh, I have to see.
If I don't see that, I'll be disturbed.
So actually, where is your freedom?
You have lost your freedom in those many yards.
You'll be forced to do certain kind of activity.
You'll be forced to eat that food item.
You'll be forced to do that.
I cannot live without a person.
You are forced to live with that person.
Something happens to him or her, and then we are disturbed immediately.
So actually, we are losing our freedom in the name of so-called enjoyment.
I want to smoke.
This is don't stop me.
Let me do whatever I let me be free.
But sir, you are not free.
You are conditioned.
Now, if you do not smoke and just like you would have realized some people,
I was seeing some of my friends.
So when we are writing a long exam for two hours and three hours,
they cannot sit because every half an hour or one hour they have to smoke.
They'll even though they have not finished the question paper,
they will leave it and go away to smoke.
They would leave early.
Not many, but some cases were there.
So, sir, where is your freedom?
You have lost your freedom.
So in that way, if we analyze, we are losing our freedom.
Are you still foreign?
So you have lost your freedom.
Nobody was going.
So we are losing our freedom by this sense enjoyment.
And by losing freedom, where is the question of happiness?
So we want freedom, but freedom is not possible by sense enjoyment rather than
actually it is possible by controlling the senses.
And ultimate freedom Krishna tells when it is possible.
Krishna mentions.
We are very much expert in analyzing how a living entity takes birth here.
Male and female gametes diffuse.
It becomes a small bubble, fleshy bubble, and then it develops.
And then in this way, the hairs, they come out and DNA and this thing replicates
and expands and all these things we are analyzing very, very nicely.
How does it happen?
So Krishna is telling you have analyzed very nicely the birth of this body,
the activities of this body, why this body is falling sick, why it is growing,
why is it happening very nicely.
You have analyzed the body, but this analysis is not helping you.
So Krishna tells what science, what analysis you are missing in life.
So Krishna tells.
Scientific knowledge or knowledge in truth as it is.
I am pure spirit.
There is no difference between body of Krishna and Krishna.
For us, there is difference.
Some people tell not Krishna, we have to surrender to the Kala or something
who was speaking Bhagavad Gita within Krishna's body.
So this is foolishness.
The Vedas declare.
There is no difference between body and soul in Ishwar.
So Ishwar, there is no difference.
Krishna is soul inside, soul outside.
His body is completely spiritual.
So Krishna does not take birth in an ordinary way here.
Krishna's birth does not follow the laws of material nature.
What is that special birth we will discuss.
We are having a special session on Wednesday, sixth of this month.
That is Narasimha Chaturdashi, Narasimhadev, who is Krishna himself,
incarnated here in a very unique form.
So these festivals are meant just so that we can understand the science of appearance of God.
So Krishna tells, if you are able to understand this science,
you have analyzed matter nicely.
But if you analyze the behavior of spirit, supreme spirit,
Janma and Karma, how that supreme spirit, what is the science?
How does he act? Why does he act? How does he take birth?
If you are able to understand scientifically these things,
Krishna has declared, once you leave this body, there won't be next birth.
You will come to me. So Arjuna.
So thus human life is meant for understanding the science of birth and activities of God.
And this science needs certain elevation.
Who can understand the science? That is mentioned here.
You can see the shloka on the screen.
7th chapter, verse number 28.
So people tell there is lot of dvandwa in the philosophies.
There is lot of moha. There is lot of illusion and dualities.
There is lot of confusion.
I don't understand about God.
Someone says this, someone else says that.
So there will always be confusion.
Prabhupada says that there is natural confusion.
Because God is Virat, Swarat, Vibhu and we are Anu.
Krishna is infinite. We are infinitesimal.
So always it is natural to be confused about God.
But if a person does paap, he breaks the regulative principles,
his body and mind gets charged with negative energies.
What is negative energy? Rajoguna and tamoguna.
Just like when a person is drunk, he cannot perceive reality as it is.
What is happening? Who is my friend? Who is enemy?
Where am I? I have fallen on the street.
He is thinking I am lying in my nice sofa.
But actually he is lying in the drain on the street.
So a person cannot perceive reality because some bad energy,
tamasic energy in the form of alcohol has entered his body.
So in a similar fashion, when we do paap, our body becomes charged with rajas and tamas.
And thus we cannot have proper perspective of life.
So to develop true perspective in order to perceive reality,
a person needs to be freed from paap.
Paap means anartha, unwanted activities.
So all those activities which do not make any sense,
they are called anartha.
It means it has some sense, some value.
Anartha means it has no value.
It is nonsense.
So when a person becomes freed from the nonsense activities,
he stops doing all the paap and he is engaged in punya karmanam.
He is engaged in good activities,
pious activities in previous life and in this life.
Such a person becomes freed from the confusion.
He increases sattva guna in his body and then he can understand the science activities of Krishna.
And bhajante maam dhridvrata.
He can do bhajante.
He can engage in maya service with strong determination.
Because there is clarity.
There is no confusion.
Krishna is God.
God exists.
He is a person.
This is the aim of life.
I cannot be happy unless I engage myself in service of God,
in always thinking of God, in loving God.
So a person is very, very easily convinced.
So this conviction arises when a person is free from lower energies and he is on sattvic energy.
So that is why anarthanivritti is required.
Anartha means any activity which is not required to keep the body and soul together.
So now whole economy is down because anarthas have come down in one sense,
at least grossly.
People are not going for blatant consumerism.
I want one house, two houses, I want this too.
I want so many packed food items are there.
All the food is there, but I want to eat from outside, from canteen, from here, from there.
Now we are living without it very, very easily.
So these are called anarthas, unwanted activity.
Any activity which is not required for keeping body and soul together, that is called anarthas.
So even Western thinkers were understanding this thing before.
That is why they told simple living and high thinking.
Now the simplicity is going away from life.
So this is very important.
That is called Brahmanical life, simple living.
Human life is meant only material endeavor should be only to maintain body and soul together
because this material enjoyment is actually restriction.
The more you enjoy, the more you get restricted.
So actually you are thinking by increasing your salary, you are becoming happy.
But no, you are creating more unhappiness for yourself.
Earlier, if you were not getting ten thousand rupees every month or one lakh rupees every month,
we were disturbed.
Now our salary is ten lakhs per month.
Now if I do not get ten lakhs per month, I will be disturbed.
So it means actually you have created more trouble in your life.
So earlier just one lakh was sufficient to keep you happy.
Now you need ten lakh rupees to keep you happy.
So sir, your hunger has not mitigated.
Your hunger has increased.
So people tell him, Prabhu, acchaise spiritual life follow karenge, let me become financially independent.
Arey aap independent ho rahe ho hai, dependent ho rahe ho hai.
Arey aap independent ho rahe ho hai, independent ho rahe ho hai.
Now I can maintain myself in twenty five thousand.
This is called independence.
And one day I can maintain myself without any money.
So that is called independence.
Independence does not mean now I have one crore rupees now independent.
No, sir, that is dependence.
So in this way, if you analyze, entire material life is nonsense and anartha.
People are becoming more and more dependent, more and more dependent.
So anything which is not required for keeping body and soul together,
because at least body and soul should be together, because in this body you can do self-realization.
That is very important body.
So that's keeping body and soul together is our duty.
And balance time is for self-realization.
That is Vedic culture.
So people would take to farming as we discussed yesterday.
Three months in a year you work hard, nine months there is no work.
You simply focus on your spiritual life very, very nicely.
So human life, just like people go for coachings, they go to quota for two years.
In a similar fashion, this human life, every moment is very valuable for self-realization.
You want to do sense enjoyment.
You have been doing always and it will be available as soon as you leave this body.
Again, you'll get another body if you are spiritually not perfect.
So sense enjoyment is always available in all the forms.
But in this life, no sir, this is preparation time, exam time.
Now you please have a simple life.
When exams are there, we somehow manage and focus on writing the paper.
Fan is not working, something does not matter.
As much as possible I should write. I have just two hours with me.
So in a similar fashion, in great eagerness, human life is meant for self-realization.
Our eyes awake because you have got this wonderful boon, human form of life.
So thus we should analyze.
Oh, I am having all these refrigerators. It is full of so many food items.
Is it required for my eating if I remove this cake from my this thing?
If I remove this coke and drinks from my thing, can I live without it?
If I remove all these biscuits, all these packed food items from my this thing, can I live without it?
Yes.
If I remove all these new bhujia packets I have got from my place, can I live without it?
Yes, I can live.
Simply I should cook very nice healthy food in which body is fit to understand God.
Can I not live without it? Yes, I can live.
If I remove TV from my place, can I live without it?
Will I die?
If the body says, you are removing the TV, I will leave the body.
Then keep the TV.
If the soul revolts.
Look, if you remove the TV, I will leave you.
Then keep the TV.
But if the soul can live in the body without TV, then what is the need for TV?
We have not seen TV for years.
So not important.
So in this way you ask yourself.
So I am feeling like watching this video.
If I don't watch this, will my soul leave the body?
If the soul tells, no, no, it will stay, then do not do it please.
In this way we have to cut down, cut down, increase your freedom and make your life more and more simple.
And actually all these Anarthas are based on four pillars.
If we break these four pillars, then we can get out of the rest of the Anarthas very easily.
And once we have come out of here, then the next stage is very easy.
Anarthanivritti is done.
Now we are not indulging ourselves in luxury and sinful activities.
Then comes the next stage, that is Nishtha.
So as long as we keep sinning, indulge in unwanted luxuries,
keep gratifying our senses, then Nishtha, firm faith and understanding will not develop.
As long as a person keeps drinking, how will the real perception of the world develop?
So all sense enjoyment is intoxication, we discussed in art of happiness.
So only intoxication to drink is all sensual enjoyment is intoxication.
These are artificial necessities we create and become addicted to it.
So till then Nishtha will not come, because our mind will not be clear.
We will not have pure understanding.
So faith will not come in the spiritual life till then.
There will be a lot of doubts.
We will be old for 10 years, 20 years, 30 years.
If there is no Anarthanivritti, then Nishtha will never come.
And then after Nishtha comes Ruchi.
Ruchi means taste.
Sometimes we may feel some taste pleasure in spiritual life,
but Ruchi means very high pleasure and always we are feeling pleasure.
Just like as soon as you eat your favorite food, there is immediate pleasure.
As soon as you watch your famous favorite TV series, there is pleasure.
So as soon as a person does anything of spiritual life,
when there is immediate pleasure, that means he is on Ruchi platform.
So once a person has firm faith, Nishtha, he is free from the Anarthas,
then Ruchi starts developing.
Then whatever he does, there is a lot of pleasure in that.
And then this Ruchi, it takes us to the next stage.
That is Asakti. Asakti means very strong attachment.
Just like tea makes a person attached, I cannot do without drinking it.
So that is called Asakti, strong attachment to it, almost addicted.
So that is next stage.
Then a person cannot do without chanting.
You tell him, don't chant, he cannot stop.
Don't read Bhagavad Gita, he cannot stop.
Don't get up early, don't do Mangala Aarti, he cannot stop.
So a person becomes strongly attached to spiritual practices.
So strong faith, then taste in spiritual practices, persistent taste,
and after that strong attachment to it, and then Bhava.
Then a person starts feeling emotions for Krishna.
And then Prema, then a person develops love of God.
As soon as he develops love of God, he understands everything about God.
And then immediately he is liberated in this body itself.
These are nine stages of spiritual life.
So generally a person, initial stages are very, very risky.
Just like a small child, anything he can eat, he can fall sick,
anybody can kidnap him, so much harm can happen to him.
So parents are always anxious.
So in the same way, as long as we are at the stage of eternal nivritti,
it is very dangerous.
Our fall down can happen anytime.
But once we come to nishtha, firm faith, then a person does not generally fall down.
So which are those four pillars which we have to break to reach the stage of nishtha?
So they are called four regulative principles.
Which are those regulations?
So it is not our mental concoction.
People say that you teach only Hare Krishna.
Other people say eat whatever you want to eat, do whatever you want to do.
Yes, they teach because they have to run their own shop.
Mungfali's shop.
They say that there are a lot of customers in Mungfali's shop.
They come and go from morning to evening.
But if you go to a diamond shop, customers would be less.
But the person who comes, there is no comparison between a person who can purchase diamond and Mungfali.
Peanuts.
So if you throw peanuts, monkey will come.
So if you want to attract monkeys, then you can have peanut philosophy.
So very cheap philosophy.
No rule and regulation.
You just become my disciple.
Give money to me.
And this thing.
And like, no, that is not fact.
So Prabhupada tells you should not keep guru for a fashion.
So people want to have some famous personality as their guru.
They are my gurus.
What does the guru say?
The guru says do whatever you want to do.
So what kind of a guru is he?
If the teacher tells you to write whatever answer you want.
Write E is equal to MC square.
Write E is equal to MC cube.
Write that too.
Everything is fine.
The doctor says eat whatever medicine you want to eat.
There is no restriction.
Then what kind of doctor he is.
So we should not keep guru like a dog for fashion.
Guru means a person should be willing to follow his advice.
So guru will give advice without any compromise.
So thus we don't compromise.
Prabhupada told.
If I compromise, make it easy.
So many, many people, they will flock behind me, but I will not compromise.
One moon is better than millions of stars.
One moon can illuminate entire sky, but all those millions of stars are useless.
So Prabhupada told.
Even if one person understood the principle of Bhagavad Gita nicely, I will consider my mission a success.
So thus we can see one moon like Prabhupada, like Bhakti Siddhanta Maharaj.
They created revolution of Krishna Consciousness on entire planet in just a matter of 10 years.
So thus one moon is sufficient.
So it is not our concoction.
So whatever rules and regulations we mentioned, they are mentioned across the Vedas, across the scriptures.
Just like it is there in Mahabharata, it is there in the Bhagavatam, other places also.
So here we see the shloka from Bhagavatam.
Dhyutampanam striya suna yatra dharmash chatur vidha.
Toh ye chaar tare ke paap hain. Kaunse chaar paap hain?
Dhyutampanam striya suna.
Meat eating, intoxication, gambling and illicit sex.
So this is called suna, meat eating or animal killing.
This is a sinful activity.
Illicit sex, intoxication and gambling.
So they have some details also, like non-veg includes meat also, fish also, seafood also and eggs also.
Everything is non-veg.
So a person should not consume these things.
And it is common sense.
Please do not give arguments like proteins and all these things I want to have.
So it is just like if somebody cuts your hand, you feel pain.
How you can cut somebody's hand simply for the pleasure of your tongue?
So it does not make any sense.
Animals also have family life, they also enjoy.
How we can kill somebody?
How we can destroy somebody's family and cut his hands and legs and put him on our plate?
So it is very, very horrible.
We are behaving like demons.
Agar animal ki education mein, unke schools mein, agar demon ko bataya jaaye, they will draw human figure.
Animal skolta latka ke skin nikaal ke, we cut them brutally and eat them.
Very, very horrible.
So people talk of big, big education.
What is the use of education when you have not developed simple sense?
Jo ek unpar aadmi ko bhi hona chahiye, mera haath kato toh dard hota hai.
Mai dosre ko itna dard kaise de sakta hoon?
Toh when a person is so foolish, how any degree will help him when he has lot basic sense also of education?
So thus, great logic is not required.
We cannot just give pain to others.
Intoxication, alcohol, drugs, tobacco, paan masala, and even tea and coffee.
So tea coffee also makes us addicted.
So that also we should leave.
Gambling, horse race, lotteries, casino, cards, we all know this.
And illicit sex.
It includes extramarital sex, obscene films.
It includes extramarital sex, obscene films, and even vulgar talks.
So all this comprises illicit sex.
So we should strictly avoid these four principles.
These four things, if you are able to follow nicely,
strictly vegetarian food offered to Krishna, no intoxication, no gambling, and no illicit sex.
Then our life will be simple.
We will gain lot of freedom and we will be able to follow other principles very very nicely automatically.
So we have to avoid these things.
And one thing is very important.
Now we are understanding the process of yoga, buddhi yoga or bhakti yoga.
So there are few prerequisites for executing any kind of yoga without which yoga will not be so effective.
That is mentioned in 7th chapter, verse 27.
So our life should be regulated.
Without regulation, it is not possible to solve the miseries of life by practicing yoga.
So which are the things in which I have to be regulated?
These are mentioned here.
First of all, eating.
The sense control starts with tongue.
If you are able to control your tongue, all the senses will be under control.
So the food that we are eating, that should be regulated.
So it should not be non-veg at all.
We have discussed it should be vegetarian food and it should be offered to Krishna.
And that also should not, we should not indulge in overeating.
We should have meals at fixed times of the day.
That is an artha.
That is greediness.
That will not help us advance in spiritual life.
So our eating should be regulated so that the body is in a fit position.
And that too in fixed times.
Not that whenever you feel like I will do it.
And Ayurveda says 25 25 50 is a principle for keeping good health.
So 50 percent of our stomach should be filled with solid food.
25 percent liquid and 25 percent should be for air to circulate for proper digestion.
In that way, we can avoid the diseases.
You have to be hard.
We are means our recreation should also be regulated.
So nowadays people are working very very hard.
That is why their minds are disturbed.
The more a person works hard, the more his mind would be disturbed.
He'll be in anxiety.
And when the mind is disturbed, where is the question of following any yoga practice?
Especially our process, which includes attentive hearing.
So any yoga you want to follow, you want to follow Gyan yoga, Ashta yoga,
whatever was possible in Satyuga previously you follow.
If you increase your endeavor, you increase your greed and mind will be disturbed.
And anyway, you cannot.
We have seen in previous sessions your destiny.
You cannot change by working hard.
So regulated work should be there.
Prabhupada mentions more than eight hours.
We should not put in our vocational duties.
And sleeping also should be regulated.
Six hours of sleep.
Six to seven hours is regulated at night.
And if required, we should not put in our vocational duties.
Six hours of sleep.
Six to seven hours is regulated at night.
And if required, one hour in the daytime.
Daytime, we should not sleep for more than one hour.
Otherwise, we go in Tamuguna.
And Yoga Bhavati Dukkha.
By following this regulation in eating, recreation, endeavor and sleep,
when we do yoga, then Dukkha, we can mitigate all the miseries of life.
So our life should be very, very balanced, very, very regulated, not whimsical.
All these things are not there.
Regulation is important in life.
And all these things.
And then we have to do yoga.
So what is our process of yoga?
It is very, very simple.
It is A, B, C, D, E.
This nice acronym is there, which we have to implement in our regular schedule.
What is this?
We have to follow A, B, C, D, E.
What is this?
We have to follow A.
A stands for association.
As we discussed, now we have developed little faith.
Now the second stage is very important.
That is association.
So this association is always very much required.
That is why Sankirtan is recommended.
Kirtan but sung in association with devotees.
In association of devotees, we are able to understand spiritual life.
And main association is association.
We have to live with devotees as far as possible.
Try to shift to some place where you have devotees, some devotee friends.
If you are a bachelor, then you can live.
We have many, many folk residencies across the country.
Immediately we should start living in that.
At least 100 times more advancement is there.
At least 100 times more advancement is there by living with devotees.
And if you are married or it is not possible to have living in our centers around the temples,
then find a devotee, try to live with him.
That is also not possible.
Then you create devotees.
Now it is very, very easy.
Now there are online sessions, everything happening.
Invite a person.
If you can explain, explain to him or you play some online session and hear with him.
And then he will also become devotee very nicely.
Everyone wants to do meditation.
Invite your neighbors that evening 15 minutes.
I do some meditation.
Would you like to join?
It is very nice.
So in this way, try to create devotees around you.
But association is very important.
We have to live with devotees and hear with them, hear from them.
So if you are not able to live with them or associate with them every day,
minimum once association in a week is very, very important.
That is why from pro pastime we have been doing Sunday feast.
Sunday special program was there.
So how much ever busy we are once in a week, we have to go and attend that program.
So not that.
Once in a week, please try to attend the lectures.
It is very, very important.
Before you would have guessed seeing on the screen book reading.
So books are specially meant for Kali Yuga and everyday reading is required
because intelligence is so poor in Kali Yuga.
What did you read yesterday?
What did you read the day before yesterday?
You forget the name of the subjects in the previous semester.
So that is why every day we have to read.
And as soon as we stop our reading, our faith becomes weak.
And if the faith becomes weak, we fall down in spiritual life.
Everything depends upon faith.
Now, because memory is so weak, today we are convinced.
After two days, if we don't read, we'll forget everything.
Our memory is very, very volatile.
So in order to keep ourselves convinced, remain on this platform of conviction,
regular association, living with devotees, hearing,
and specially book reading is very, very important in Kali Yuga.
So please do not miss this book reading apart from the chanting that you're doing every day.
I'll share all the books of Prabhupada PDF in the Telegram channel.
And I've shared the sequence also already today.
In that sequence, you can try to finish the books.
Chanting. Now, obviously, this is most important and basis of spiritual life.
Whatever you miss, sometimes you are very busy some day.
So maybe book reading you can manage.
Other day you can do more or something like that can happen.
But chanting, please, you can never miss.
Every day we have to do chanting.
It is very important and don't do as a formality with great attention.
If you are watching TV, phone, and chanting, it is a crime.
You are calling God and not paying attention.
So very offensive.
We'll advance very, very slowly.
So with great attention, we have to chant.
A, B, C, D. Now D has two aspects.
Deity worship and dite.
So Krishna is not different from his form.
So you can experiment yourself with great love.
If you do not have a deity of Krishna, deity has higher standards.
You can have some picture of Krishna.
Very simple picture.
Just like I have this picture here.
You can see.
So this is there.
When calendar is there, you can keep or some picture you can have.
You can take out some print and then simply offer some flowers or some incense,
some lamp to simply frame picture of Krishna with great love.
Praying to Krishna, please engage me in your service.
Thank you for engaging me in your service.
And in this way, you'll feel tremendous spiritual advancement.
Simply by offering incense, lamp or some flowers to the deity.
Very, very powerful process.
It appears ordinary, but it is very powerful.
And dite.
Dite means now this is very important shloka.
So here in the shloka, it is mentioned.
Agham Paap means sinful activity.
Agham Paap means very great sin he is committing.
So some people say that if we are consuming vegetables,
then is that not a sin?
Yes, that is also a sin.
In consuming vegetarian food also, lot of killing is involved.
A person has to, first of all, he has to plough the field.
Many bacteria, germs, they can die.
Many insects can die.
And then you have to harvest.
And then when you are eating, when you are cooking in the fire,
so many microbes die.
When you are eating, you drink water.
So many microorganisms die.
So a lot of killing is involved in that.
You eat potatoes, tomatoes, entire plant is out, plant is dead.
So a lot of killing is happening.
So unlimited killing is involved in eating process.
So that is why in our country, there was a culture.
Unless you offer to God, nobody will consume food.
Restaurants was out of question.
When the travelers would travel, they would eat in a temple.
Temples will have sufficient stock of prasadam for the travelers.
They will stay in dharmashala in temple and eat in the temple.
So this consuming food from restaurant is very dangerous,
especially the person who is cooking food.
His consciousness gets transferred to the food.
An angry person cooks food.
You will become angry by eating that food.
A very lusty person cooks food will become lusty by eating that food.
So his qualities will get automatically.
Thus the devotees, they don't cook food.
They don't eat food cooked by non devotees.
Only you standing 16 rounds and follows everything.
And that also we have to offer to Krishna.
So when you eat food cooked by devotee, which has been cooked in great devotional mode,
we also automatically develop spiritual consciousness, devotional consciousness.
So what happens when the plant or the species, whatever,
So this is the understanding.
Atmakaaranat, never for self.
So when we offer it to Krishna, then that plant,
which slowly evolves and comes in human form,
and then becomes self-realized,
directly that plant gets promoted to human form of life.
So that plant anyway was supposed to die.
And if that plant is offered to Krishna, its life is successful.
Immediately it gets promoted to human form.
So thus we are not vegetarians and we are not non-vegetarians.
We are krishnitarians.
Whatever Krishna eats, we eat that.
So this science people do not know.
So our culture is very, very valuable and very important.
In chapter 13 verse, it is written.
It is very important.
That is why Krishna is mentioning in ABCD of spiritual life.
It is very simple.
Just don't put onion and garlic.
Without onion and garlic, you put and you offer the food to Krishna.
And that's it.
And simply when you offer the food which is given to Krishna,
that is called yagya shishtha.
Santas, saintly persons, by eating yagya shishtha,
Krishna prasadam, muchyante sarvikil vishay,
they get rid of their sins.
We are suffering because of our past sins.
And if we take prasad, only God's prasad, nothing else,
then we will get rid of all our past sins and we will be happy.
Just see.
A person can be happy only by eating food.
If he has offered food to God.
A person can be free from all his past sins.
That's why only taking prasadam,
our followers are very, very strict.
So simply two things.
Don't eat anything which doesn't offer food to God.
And whenever our tongue is free as much as possible,
keep on chanting the name of Krishna.
What will be easier than this?
Just by eating and chanting the name,
we are advancing in our spiritual life.
We will understand everything about God.
We will be free from all laws of nature by following this process.
So very important shloka.
So that's why A for association.
Ideally, we should try to live with devotees,
meet with them every day or at least once in a week,
we should hear from them, minimum association.
B for book reading every day.
C for chanting.
D for deity worship and diet.
So the way doctor recommends diet and also gives medicine.
So in the same way, for us, diet is Krishna's prasadam
and medicine is chanting association, deity worship.
And then E, A, B, C, D, E.
Engagement is very important.
Ata Shri Krishna Naam Adi Na Bhaved Grahayam Indriya.
It is difficult to understand God through our senses.
Sevan Mukhe Hi Jivvaadau.
When a living entity becomes Sevan Mukha service oriented,
Swayam eva Svaratyadaha.
Ye aap screen pe dekh rahein maharaj Pratap Rudra ko.
Maharaj Pratap Rudra 500 saal pehle Orissa ke raja the.
Us time pe Muslim ka shasan tha poori desh mein.
And the Muslims were very very strong,
but they could not capture Orissa because
Pratap Rudra maharaj was pure devotee of Jagannath, of Krishna.
So he was always trying to meet Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
but a saintly person does not like to meet rich men usually,
because they are in maya and sensual enjoyment.
So he was not meeting, but when he saw
that he is sweeping the street in the service of God,
he became very very pleased.
And thus he gave all spiritual advancement to Maharaj Pratap Rudra.
So engagement, engaging in seva of Krishna is very very important.
So we have to do sadhana and seva.
So we saw the things for sadhana and this is seva.
So some people were asking,
Prabhu Bhagavad Gita kaise padna hai?
I told hum batayenge.
So this is the way of reading Bhagavad Gita.
Krishna tells in 4th chapter,
A person has to be humble, not argumentative and challenging.
Pariprasnena, he should ask, he should be inquisitive and sevaya.
Sevaya means seva karna bahot zaruri hai.
Aur seva kisi bhi madhyam se kar sakte hain.
Aap bhagwan ka shrengar kar rahe hain, wo seva hai.
Bhagwan ko bhog lagar rahe hain, wo seva hai.
Bhagwan ke saamne baith ke keertan kar rahe hain, wo seva hai.
Lekin sabse zaruri aur important seva hai.
Krishna Bhagavad Gita ke end mein kehte hain.
Preaching.
Ya imam paramam guhyam mad bhakteshu abhidasyati.
Logon ko ye gyan dena, jisse wo jeevan ki samasyaan ko solve kar sakte hain.
So thus the most important engagement is preaching work.
So this is what we have to implement.
A, B, C, D, E.
Association.
Book reading.
Everyday.
C for chanting everyday.
D for deity worship and diet.
Very simple.
And E for engagement.
So preaching kaise kare hain apne resources ko preaching mein use karna hai.
Whatever hard earned money we have.
If we don't have money, no problem.
Then whatever energy we have, our time energy we can use for preaching.
That is also not possible.
Then what to do?
Dhiya.
We have intelligence.
Use intelligence for how I can spread this message.
You have some skills, try to spread the message using those skills.
Kuch skill bhi nahi hain, buddhu hain, buddhi hi nahi hain.
Toh kya karen, toh bhi seva kar sakte hain.
Vacha.
We have tongue.
Use this tongue.
This Bhagavad Gita is very nice.
This Hare Krishna Mantra is very nice.
Please you also chant in some way or the other.
Try to engage yourself in spreading this message.
Spreading the Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
Arey Prabhu, bada difficult bata diya aapne.
Ye bhog lagana hai Bhagawan ko.
Bhog laga hua khaana hai.
Bahar ki cheez nahi khaani hai.
It is very difficult.
Meat eating nahi.
Intoxication nahi.
Chai coffee bhi mushkil hai.
Pyaj lehsun bhi rokna hai.
Aur kya kya bata diya aapne.
Gambling bhi nahi kar sakte hain.
Aur ye toh bahar difficult ho jayega humare liye.
So no, it's not difficult.
It is difficult because humko higher pleasure abhi nahi mila hai.
So Krishna tells,
Vishaya abhi ni vartante nira harasya dehina.
Aap restrict karenge apne aapko.
Sirf toh taste rahega apne mann mein.
But param drishtwa.
Ek bar aapko higher taste aagaya spiritual life ka.
Toh ye cheezne apne aap chhoot jayenge dheere dheere.
Toh se negative cheezon ke baare me zyada parishan nahi hona hai.
Humare past habits hongi.
Zyada forces honge nature ke.
Positive process ko aapche se apply kariye.
A, B, C, D, N, E.
Uske baad spiritual taste aega strength milegi.
Automatically aap saare anarthas ko chhod denge.
Bhagawan me strong faith develop ho jayega.
Bho zyada taste aane laga ke spiritual life mein.
Spiritual life would be success.
So thus it is very simple.
Keep on chanting Hare Krishna Maha Mantar every day.
Read every day.
Have devotee association.
Spread this message.
And then automatically everything will follow.
But this anarthane vritti is very important.
This is the principle of freedom.
Getting freedom from anarthas.
If we are free from anarthas, unwanted things,
then we are advancing towards the path of spiritual life.
So consciously we should try to make our life simple and simple
by engaging in positive spiritual practices.
This is the principle of gaining freedom,
not just from any British rule,
but freedom from even death and all the laws of nature.
