So today's session is real yoga. The session is dedicated to His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, our spiritual master and the founder Acharya of worldwide Hare Krishna movement.
So what is yoga? Whenever we hear that our friend is going for yoga classes, what appears in our mind?
So we have this workshop also by the name Yoga for Happiness.
So when people enroll for it, they ask, Prabhuji please tell me what to do, which yoga mat to bring, which clothes to wear.
So generally, whenever we hear the word yoga, yoga class, yoga session, yoga workshop, what comes to our mind is the conventional general understanding is asana.
We will be doing some postures and obviously pranayama, breathe in, breathe out, focus on breath and like that.
So this is the conventional understanding of yoga.
Actually, the word yoga is derived from the Sanskrit root yuj that is called dhatu, yuj dhatu.
What does it mean? It means to link or to connect. So yoga means to link or to connect. Connect with what?
So it is a process of linking ourselves with God. That is called yoga.
Now, what is the use of connecting with God?
Many times our devotees, volunteers, when they approach others, they please follow this yoga, read Bhagavad Gita, they tell what is the use?
What is the use of knowing God? What is the use of connecting with God? I am happy at my own place.
So Lord Krishna in Bhagavad Gita tells to Arjuna, it is a very nice shloka.
So Lord Krishna tells,
So Krishna tells to Arjuna, there are four categories of people, civilized people who are advanced in civilization.
Most of the human species, many times they are uncivilized,
Tribals live in the jungles and their life is almost like animals.
Difficult to classify whether they are humans or not, but human civilization starts with that.
And some people are civilized among the human beings.
And the most civilized people among the humans, they are classified in four categories in the Vedic culture.
So first category is Karmic. So what is this Karmic?
Ultimately, whatever category it may be, everyone in this world is trying to become happy.
And everyone has his or her own conception of happiness.
So what is the happiness conception of, let's say a child.
Child thinks, let me play a computer game or Gully cricket entire day.
There is no need to go to school.
So for him, happiness means morning to evening.
Let him play, let him eat and sleep. That is happiness.
He has no idea to think, oh, why my father does not play every day.
Why he goes out early morning or whatever late morning and then he comes back late in the night.
So why, what is he doing? Why he's working every day? He cannot think about it.
I also have to grow up one day. I have to take responsibility. I need money for that.
I need to go to school. He cannot understand all these things.
Less intelligent. So 99.9% of the population, they are classified in this category.
That is Karmic. Actually, now even not even Karmic. They are called Vikarmic.
So Karmic means a person thinks enjoyment of senses is my aim of life.
And whatever work he does, some results come out of that work.
And he wants to enjoy that result for himself. That is called Karmic.
However, those people who think enjoyment of senses is the aim of life, they also take the help of Vedas.
So just like we want enjoyment, I want money, but I cannot simply go to the neighbor's house and take out the money from his locker.
That is illegal. There is a legal way of getting money in a similar fashion.
There is a legal way of enjoying material happiness also in this world.
And those people who legally want to enjoy material life, they are called Karmic.
Then there is second category. That is Gyanibhyopi Matodhika.
That is called Gyanee. Gyanee person understands when a person follows the Vedas very nicely to enjoy material happiness.
That is why the four Purusharthas are recommended.
There are five but fifth one people do not have knowledge.
So there are four or five endeavors that a person is supposed to do, execute in human form.
Dharam, Arth, Kaam, Moksha and after that Prema, which people very less people know about it.
So Dharam. Dharam means do religiosity, follow the religion very, very nicely.
If you are religious, then what will happen? Sustainable economic development will happen.
Not like today's unsustainable economic growth.
Dharam, Arth. Arth means resources. You'll get money.
And after generating resources and money, now we have money earlier.
Money was not there. Barter system and other things were there.
So resources are money you generate. And then after that, what will happen?
You'll fulfill your desires, sensual desires. That is called Kaam.
And how much ever you work hard to enjoy the senses, you will never be satisfied.
So then what will happen? Then a person understands.
So I've got all the money. I followed everything nicely, but still I'm not satisfied.
Dharam, Arth, Kaam and then Moksha.
Then he aspires for Moksha. Oh, I think liberation. I want liberation.
That is called Gyani. So when a person follows the path of Vedas,
he will get the material resources. But even by those resources, he would not be satisfied.
That is called Gyani. And Gyani's aim of life, Gyani understands.
I will not be happy. I will not be satisfied by enjoying the sensual happiness.
So that is why what I'm supposed to do. So I want liberation, Moksha.
I'm not this body. Just a moment. Few people are raising their hands.
Let me see. What is the issue? Is there some issue with the session?
You can write in the chat box. So not audible.
OK, you can please click on the bottom left headset icon on your phone
and then click call via device and then you'll be able to hear it.
So the second category is called Gyani. Gyani understands.
I am not the body, so not enjoyment, expanding my material desires,
which are never satisfied. I should try to curtail my desires.
Then I'll be happy. And that is called.
Then his aim of life becomes Moksha, freedom from birth and death.
Then there is third category that is called Tapasvi. Tapasvi, he understands.
Tapasya means voluntarily accepting discomforts in life.
Now we want to increase our comforts. Well, let me have air conditions also.
Let me have cars also. So earlier in some early 90s or 80s,
very, very less people were having car in our country.
Even the kings of early ages, their Rathas were not so comfortable as our cars are today.
But are people more happy in almost every other house as in air condition?
But are people more happy? So the comforts, luxuries have increased many folds,
but people are not happy, not satisfied. So Tapasvi realizes this.
Actually, I have to not increase the comforts, but increase the discomforts.
So we are all enjoying or suffering because of our past activities.
And if we have broken some laws of nature,
then the result is going to come in the form of disease, loss of money,
loss of peace of mind, loss of some family members, some relative business, XYZ.
So Tapasya means voluntarily accepting discomfort.
That is why people in Vedic culture, it is recommended.
You get up early in the morning getting up early Tapasya.
You are supposed to get a four o'clock Brahmurta everyone.
So a person wants to sleep more and more getting up early Tapasya.
Then take a cold water bath. Even in winter season, it is definitely a Tapasya.
And take two to three baths in a day. That is Vedic culture. That is Tapasya.
And then you fast on certain days, especially two days in a month Ekadashi.
So all those who want to advance in spiritual life, please start fasting on Ekadashi.
That is very important. So on Ekadashi, a person is supposed to fast as far as possible,
even without water if possible. But in this age, we are very weak.
So fruit, milk, some light items we can take.
But Tapasya, voluntarily accepting discomfort, going for pilgrimage, doing Parikrama.
In Vrindavan, people do Govardhan Parikrama.
In Tirupati, people climb all those steps to reach the temple.
So why people take voluntary austerity?
So by austerity, all those sufferings which are going to come in our life,
so we have got rid of voluntarily, we have accepted some suffering.
So whatever suffering was supposed to come to me in future, that will not come now
because voluntarily I've accepted and at the same time I have advanced in my spiritual life also.
Brahmacharya, that is very great Tapasya.
Naturally, a person wants to enjoy, but Brahmacharya controlling the sex life is a great Tapasya.
And Brahmacharya, it is so powerful that if a person does not execute anything,
simply remains a Brahmachari, then next life he is promoted to the topmost planetary system of this universe
where comforts are much, much, much higher than on this planet,
hundreds and thousands of times more than on this planet.
And person is so free on that planet.
That there is no gross body made up of these gross elements, earth, air, water, fire, sky, arteries, veins and bones.
A person simply lives in a subtle body.
So that is the life of Satya Loka. So Brahmacharya is such a strong wow Tapasya.
So Tapasya makes a person very, very powerful.
Mahatma Gandhi was able to get the country freed because of strongly following Brahmacharya.
From the age of I think 34 years he started following Brahmacharya.
Even though he was a householder and because of this he got tremendous strength.
He was able to lead many, many people.
Gandhari, she got herself blindfolded because her husband also wasn't able to see.
And because of this, Gandhari developed unique mystical powers.
So a woman simply if she follows chastity,
Pativarat Dharma very, very nicely, mind and senses are completely controlled,
dedicated to one's husband only.
She also develops mystical powers which a yogi can develop by going to mountains.
A woman can develop those powers by following Satitva, Pativarat Dharma, Chastity very, very nicely.
So this is the power of Tapasya.
So that is why earlier because Tapasya was part of the thing, people were happy.
Voluntarily they would accept discomforts in life and thus they would be very, very powerful also.
One single king would rule over entire planet for many, many years.
Now even hundreds of people, they come together in a coalition government.
And even after making a full government, they are not able to rule.
Because there is no Tapasya in life.
One notification came on the phone, I cannot control myself.
I have to see which notification came.
So no mind control, no sense control.
So that is why people are very weak.
If someone says something, a person gets disturbed.
Sometimes he gets so disturbed that either he will kill him or he will commit suicide.
So tolerance has gone down like anything.
So people have become so weak.
The other person has said something and they are not able to tolerate it.
And earlier there was so much tolerance in such advanced spiritual consciousness
that Bheeshma is lying on the bed of arrows and it does not make any difference.
He is telling how to rule, what is dharma, what are the rules, what is the perfection of spiritual life.
God is giving all the knowledge.
So this is the difference.
So that is why it is very important to do Tapasya in life.
So some people who are the most foolish people,
all of us are like this in today's society.
We have been taught that ever since the Gurukul system was removed,
people have been taught in school,
work, earn money, earn fame, show it to neighbors, show it to relatives.
When their heart burns, you will get a lot of happiness from it.
This is the success of life. This is happiness of life.
This is how we are trained.
Increase your material comforts in which there is no end to it and a person is dissatisfied.
So however all these categories, whether a person can be Karmic,
who works hard to satisfy the senses or who is a Jnani, who wants Moksha
or who is Tapasvi, who wants to do Tapasya for getting some powers or elevation to higher planets,
Chaturmasya, many Tapasya have been taught.
These three categories of people, all three of them are dissatisfied.
Bhukti Mukti Siddhi Kami Sakalaya Shanta
Krishn Bhakta Nishakam Atayeva Shanta
Only the devotee of Lord Krishna can remain calm.
The way if you see the fish on the screen, take it out of the water.
Give money to the fish for food, give everything that the fish needs.
The fish cannot be happy. Leave the fish in the water.
In the same way, we are not the living beings of this physical world.
We are not human beings who have temporary spiritual experience.
When we go on Sunday, do Kirtan, do Japa, then we have spiritual experience.
No, we are spiritual beings having temporary human experience.
We are completely made up of spirit as we saw in the first session.
And we are having temporary human experience.
Not that we are humans and we sometimes have spiritual experience.
No, we are spiritual beings.
When we come to material world, sometimes we become human, sometimes fish, sometimes insects, snakes, reptiles, animals and so on and so forth.
So we are spiritual beings.
So we can be satisfied in spiritual atmosphere only.
That is why it is told Asatoma Satgamaya.
This creation where we are living, it is made up of matter.
The soul has to transfer itself from material world to the place which is completely made up of spirit.
Krishna says,
That is my place. That is where I live.
So that is why Krishna told to Arjuna who was in great stress.
He tells,
Arjuna, a yogi is better than Karmī, yogi is better than Jnani, yogi is better than Tapasvi.
So please become yogi, O Arjuna.
And Arjuna accepted whatever Krishna told.
Krishna, I am accepting whatever you tell, I will follow in total.
But if we see, Arjuna did not follow any so-called asana or pranayama.
Although Arjuna told, yes, Krishna, I will follow whatever you are saying.
Krishna is telling Arjuna, please become yogi, please become yogi, yogi is better than all these other categories.
And Arjuna tells, yes, I will become yogi.
But Arjuna did not become yogi. Arjuna did not become a doer of asana and pranayama.
But still he agreed, I will become yogi.
It means yoga is something which Arjuna did which need not involve asana and pranayama.
So thus we have heard of various yoga systems.
In Bhagavad Gita, Lord Krishna talks about karma yoga, jnani yoga, bhakti yoga and ashtanga yoga.
And most of them, karma yoga does not involve any asana, jnani yoga does not involve any asana,
bhakti yoga does not involve any asana, the asana pranayama which we understand today as a synonym of yoga.
These are but two elements of ashtanga yoga which has eight elements in total.
So actually people are getting cheated in the name of yoga and some people are telling I am yog guru.
No, you call yourself asana guru and pranayama guru.
Please do not call yourself a yog guru because if a person is telling asana and pranayama
and not teaching other six elements, the ashtanga yoga will never be success.
So these eight elements, ashtanga yoga, which is also called raj yoga or hatha yoga,
it begins with yam and niyam, do's and don'ts.
There are many, many do's and don'ts.
And after yam, niyam, do's and don'ts come asana and pranayama.
So what are the do's and don'ts? Let us see.
First of all, Shucha Udeshe Prathishthapya.
Sari duniya yoga day celebrate kariye bhai. 21st June ko hum yoga manayenge.
And then we will go to stadium.
Stadiums are packed in Wall Street.
On the street, people are putting their mats and stretching their hands and legs and doing yoga.
But this is not how yoga can be done.
People are in their room in their yoga mat.
They are doing yoga and in big assemblies in yoga shalas.
People are practicing yoga.
No, shastras never recommend Patanjali.
Rishi never recommends who has given Patanjali yoga sutra.
Shucha Udeshe Prathishthapya.
First of all, you have to go to secluded Shucha U, sacred place, pure place.
Yes, Prabhuji, mera ghar bhot pure hai. Daily Lizaul se pocha lagate hain, jadu lagate hain.
No, that is not pure.
Here, purity means Satvugna.
So the place made of bricks and stones, that is Rajasik place.
So the villages, the cities, they are Rajasik.
Movie halls, multiplex, malls and wherever we go, eateries, restaurants, they are Tamasik places.
So what is Satvik place?
That is jungles and mountains.
That is called pure place, where pure energy, Satvik environment is there.
So first of all, you have to go to mountain and jungle to practice this yoga.
Apne ghar mein batke aap ashtang yog nahi kar sakte, wo sif chhalava hoga.
Haan, it is not bad, aap doctor ki fees bacha sakte hain, aapki body fit rahegi,
agar aap asan karenge pranayam karenge.
Lekin agar aap soch rahe hain, aapko yoga result mil jayega ye asan pranayam karke, you are mistaken, sorry.
This is not how it is to be done.
Agar yoga karna hai to sabse pehle shucha udeshe prathistha pe Bhagavad Gita ke 6. Adhyaya ko kholke padhiye.
Sabse pehle ghar chorna padega, sannyas lena padega.
Ghar mein rahege ye process follow nahi kar sakte.
Lead a life of complete celibacy.
Tapasa brahmacharya na shamena damena cha.
Complete celibacy follow karna hai.
Celibacy does not simply means not marrying.
Even in mind, thought of enjoyment with other gender should not come.
No enjoyment, no thought.
Mind should be pure, body should be pure, thought should be pure.
In this way, in complete purity, a person has to lead a life.
That is called actual celibacy.
Never watching movies.
Karmana manasavacha sarva vasthasu sarvada.
Yajna valkya says, sarvatra meh tunne parityago brahmacharyam prachakshate.
In all circumstances, at all times, in mind, body and speech,
A person neither talks about sex life, neither thinks about it and never does it.
That is called brahmacharya.
So a person has to follow strict brahmacharya.
And he has to go to jungle and mountains.
And he has to lay kusha grass on the ground.
Ye plastic ke yoga mat mein karne se nahi hoga.
So kusha grass, ek special grass aati hai, uska orientation karna padta hai proper.
It is a great science.
And then sit alone.
And jo aapka asana hai, it is told, it should not be very, very high.
Aap Mount Everest pe kar rahe hain.
You have to put deer skin.
And so, so many procedures are there.
And then you have to sit alone.
Rigid posture you have to sit without moving.
Aapka head bhi move nahi hona chahiye.
Aur aankho ko you have to focus.
Eyes should be half closed, not fully closed.
Eyes ko half closed karke, we have to stare at the tip of the nose.
And you have to keep on staring, keep on staring, keep on staring for a very, very long time.
Even if tiger is coming next to you in jungle, you cannot say, oh tiger.
You cannot see.
Simply keep on staring at your nose.
Tiger may come, snake may come, anything, anybody may come.
But you cannot change your posture.
So slowly a person is supposed to minimize his eating also, minimize his sleeping also.
Make his eating, sleeping, everything zero.
And keep on sitting, keep on sitting like that for a very, very long time without moving.
So a person has to forego eating, sleeping, drink and very, very difficult process.
So very few people were able to perform this process.
And this process also, how much you have to sit like this in a rigid posture for one year, for two years,
for thousands of years.
Rishi Valmiki did.
He sat like this for how many years?
Sixty thousand years.
So our lifespan is barely eighty, ninety or a hundred years.
How can we expect ourselves to sit for thousands of years?
So it is not practical.
First of all, a person cannot follow Brahmacharya.
Mass media and phones and Internet, we destroy Brahmacharya.
Thus we lose concentration, lose mental strength, memory and physical strength also.
There is no tapasya in life.
So a person cannot follow Brahmacharya.
Where is the question of any advancement then further?
Who can leave his house, family and go to jungle and this thing?
He can leave family, people and in any way unhappy.
But still you cannot go and live in mountains and jungles.
It is not possible.
And sit alone in a rigid posture with fearlessness.
Keep on staring at the tip of your nose.
And for thousands, so not possible this thing.
So it is not practical.
So some people tell, why do you write all other yogas in Bhagavad Gita?
Why do you tell about bhakti yoga?
Why do you tell about the process of chanting?
Krishna recommended the other processes.
And Arjuna rejected the other processes.
Krishna is telling us to tell because Arjuna was not able to follow.
Arjuna was so advanced in Brahmacharya in other things.
When Apsara told Arjuna, marry me, enjoy with me.
He said, no, you are like my mother, how can I enjoy?
And then Virat Maharaj, he wanted to offer his daughter to Arjuna.
And Arjuna told, no, no, I am the teacher.
I have taught her dance.
The teacher is like father.
So I can accept her as my daughter-in-law.
Arjuna was such a strong person in his vow.
And when Arjuna was recommended this process in the sixth chapter,
Arjuna told with folded hands,
My mind is very, very restless.
Mind it, Arjuna was not born in today's restless world.
Arjuna was trained very nicely in Gurukul.
He was telling, I can see just the eye of the bird.
He was having such great concentration that seeing in the water,
he would shoot the fish's eye on the ceiling.
And such a person is telling, my mind is very fickle.
I can control wind also with the power of my arrows,
but I cannot control my mind.
So what to speak of the people who are so much disturbed in Kalyuga.
So Krishna tests his disciples.
Shukde Goswami also tested Parikshit Maharaj.
Similarly, Krishna tested Arjuna and Arjuna told, not possible.
So then Krishna told, don't worry, Arjuna, you are already highest yogi
because you are always thinking of me within your heart and you are engaged in my service.
So thus all these yoga systems are recommended in Bhagavad Gita
so that Arjuna can reject it.
And thus in future generations, people don't remain in illusion.
No, Arjuna rejected this process.
So why other processes are there?
Because it is for different yogas.
So this meditation process which is called as Ashtang yoga,
Dhyan yoga, Raj yoga, Hath yoga,
this is Krita yoga, Satyoga.
Krita means Satyoga.
It was to be done in Satyuga.
And meditation is also to be done on whom?
Nowadays people are cheating so much that the whole world is getting cheated.
They teach meditation.
On whom do they teach meditation?
Meditate on your Nasika's head,
meditate on your eyebrows,
meditate on some chakra,
meditate on breath,
meditate on the moon star,
This is all cheating.
On whom we have to meditate?
Just see here it is written.
You have to meditate upon Vishnu.
You have to chant and hear about Vishnu, not about anybody else.
You have to think about Vishnu.
So the yogis, they meditate upon Vishnu within their hearts.
Yogihriddhyanagamyam yogihriddhyanagamyam yogi,
when he is meditating hriddh,
within his heart he meditates upon this form.
So always it is recommended that a person has to meditate upon Krishna,
Lord Vishnu, the supreme person within his heart.
So these are all cheating yoga.
Whenever you come across any person who is telling you,
meditate upon breath,
meditate upon some chakra,
meditate upon nothing, meditate upon XYZ,
he is simply cheating people.
This is never ever any place,
neither in Patanjali Yoga Sutra ever it is recommended.
This is only simply cheating
because unless I recommend some different kriya,
some different sadhana,
some different dhyan process,
who will follow me?
So thus, just like people create new features in a phone,
they are trying to create new features in yoga.
In America they have hundreds or thousands, I think,
of Patanjali Yoga systems.
This is all cheating.
If you go to authority, Bhagavatam, Yoga Sutras,
this is what is mentioned.
Dhyaay to Vishnum.
Dhyan Vishnu pe karna hai.
Kirtay satyug mein karna hai.
Tretayug mein kya karna hai?
Tretayam yajatomakhay.
Tretayug mein yagya karna hai.
Dwa pare paricharyayam.
Dwa pareyug mein Bhagawan ke Sri Vigrah ki mandir mein upasana.
Kalau.
Kalyug mein ye result kaise milega?
Karna hi nahi kar sakta.
Corona ho jayega.
Ab ghar se bahar nahi ja paayenge.
Tretayam.
Tretayug mein yagya karne ka pravadhan tha.
Yagya ki agni mantro se prajwalit hoti hai.
Naaki gas lighter se.
Kirtayadhya hai.
Satyug mein dhyan karna tha.
Kalyug mein ye possible nahi hai.
Isle shastra kehte hain.
Kalau tad hari keertanad.
Kalyug mein kaise sambhav hoga?
By chanting the names of Hari.
Tad hari keertanad.
Aur koi keertan nahi bataya gaya hai.
Kisi aur ka naam liji.
Kuch aur kariye.
Tad hari keertanad.
Hari ka naam lena hai.
To Satyug mein meditation.
Tretayug mein yagya.
Aur Dwaparyug mein elaborate temple worship.
So aap dekh rahe hain.
Satyug mein kya sthiti ho jati thi.
Aadmi ke upar jataayen aayenge.
Kai baar cheetiyan bambi banalenge.
Because saikado varsho se aadmi hila nahi hain usjage se.
Is tera se yogi baitha raheta tha waha par.
Bina hile dule.
Kai baar uska maan saare cheetay aake insects aake kha jaate the.
Par usko hilna nahi hain.
Itna zyada samadhi mein lean raheta hai yogi.
To Satyug mein humari jo aayu hai wo ek laakh varsh hua karte the.
Tretayug mein aayu 10,000 saal ho gayi.
Dwaparyug mein aayu 1000 saal the.
Isliye Bible mein agar aap padhenge.
To Bhagwad Gita ke pehle humne Bible padhi jao hum school mein the.
To Bible mein likha tha ki 700 800 saal logon ki umar hai.
So I was wondering ki yeh lagta hai koi story hai.
Koi fiction hai.
800 saal 1000 saal koi aadmi kaise jee sakta hai.
But then I got to know us time pe Dwaparyug mein 1000 saal.
1000 saal average hua karte the humari.
Aur Kalyug mein 100 saal bhi nahi hai humari age.
To isliye saare process aap possible nahi hai.
To particular yug ke liye wo process recommended tha.
To Kalyug mein chanting of the holy names of the Lord is the only way.
To jaise ki kal humne dekha if we have to have perfect knowledge.
We need to go to Vedas.
Authority.
So agar aapko koi bhi process recommend karta hai.
Yeh dhyan gayi hai.
Yeh sadhana samadhi kari hai.
Fortunately vedon ko sab log maante hain, authorised person.
Jo bhi dhyan ke baare mein baate kar raha hai.
To usse please puchiye.
Sir, Guruji, Prabhu, Swami ji.
Yeh shastro mein kaha par likha hai ki Kalyug mein yeh process karna hai.
The person will not be able to tell you.
Because all the scriptural references for Kalyug are only about one process.
To vedon mein alag-alag segments hote hain.
Sahita ho gayi.
Puran ho gayi.
Upanishad ho gayi.
Tantra ho gayi.
To abhi time humare pas kam hai.
To kuchhi reference hum le paayenge.
Har ek segment se.
To sahita ki baat kare.
Narayanth sahita kyaate.
Dwaapari yari janay vishnu pancha raatra istu keval hai.
Dwaapari yug mein bhagwan ki mandir mein jo paasna karne se.
Vishnu bhagwan ki paasna karne se result milta tha.
Kalautu naam matrena tu.
But Kalyug mein naam matrena.
Keval naam matre se wo sambhav ho payega.
Aur naam bhi kaunsa lehna hai.
Koi bhi naam le sakte hai bhagwan ki.
Bahoti powerful hai.
But ek special combination.
Kali santran upanishad.
Specially Kalyug ke liye bataya gaya hai.
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna.
Hare Hare Hare Ram Hare Ram Ram Ram Hare.
Iti shodhshakam naam naam.
Yeh jo sola shabd hain.
Kali kalmash naashnam.
Kalyug ki saari buraiyon ka naash kar dete hain.
Shodhshakam naam sola shabd.
To aap bolenge, theek hai yeh to naash kar dete hain.
Lekin mere paas ek dosra mantra hai.
Woh aur bhi achha naash kar rega.
Koi dosra upaye, dosra samadhi dhyan kriya hai mere paas.
Woh zyada kaam karegi.
To aage Brahma ji batara hai Naradmani ko.
Natah parthar upaye.
Isse achha upaye.
Sarva vedeshu drishyate.
Saare vedon mein dhurne ke baad bhi humko milta hai.
To bahoti clearly likha hua hai.
Isse achha upaye kahin bhi nahi milega.
In sola shabdo ko japne se achha.
To specially Kaliug ke liye bataya gaya.
Kali kalmash naashnam.
Kali santaran upanishad.
Kevar chaar shlok hain.
Only four shlokas are there in this upanishad.
It is so important.
Brahma is chilling to Naradmani.
So please ask any other person.
Your process, where it is mentioned that
this sadhana will do Kali kalmash naashnam.
This kriya, this tapasya, this vrata will do Kali kalmash naashnam.
Nobody will be able to quote any single reference.
Even one reference a person cannot quote.
I challenge openly.
If you talk about puranas.
Hare ranaam, Hare ranaam, Hare ranaam, eva kevalam.
Brahan Nardiya purana says three times.
Hare ranaam, Hare ranaam, Hare ranaam.
That is the only way.
Eva kevalam.
Kalav in Kali Yuga.
Again please see it is mentioned.
Kalav, kalav, kalav, Kali Yuga.
Three times it is mentioned.
No other way, no other way, no other way.
There is no other way.
So when three times anything is told in the Veda
that is to be taken as super final.
There is nothing beyond it.
So here Brahan Nardiya purana tells.
Hare ranaam, Hare ranaam, Hare ranaam.
This is the only way.
There is no other way, no other way, no other way.
For kalav in Kali Yuga.
They were there for other yugas.
But in Kali Yuga there is no other way.
Srimad Bhagavatam.
There are several descriptions of Kali Yuga.
What is going to happen?
Corona is not even the beginning.
Many horrible things are about to come.
The prediction is done by Veda Vyas.
What will happen in Kali Yuga?
But then he tells.
Rajan, O Great King Parikshit.
Kaler dosh nidhe.
Kali Yuga is ocean of faults.
Asti hiye ko mahaan guna.
Asti. But there is one great quality of Kali Yuga.
What is that great quality?
Kirtanadeva Krishnasya.
By Kirtan.
Chanting the name of Krishna.
Mukta sanga param vrajet.
A person gets freedom from all the laws of nature.
Freedom from death. Freedom from disease.
Freedom from old age. Freedom from all miseries.
And param vrajet.
The person goes to spiritual world.
Toh aadmi Bhagwan ke dhaam ko prapt hota hai.
Janmavrityu ke cycle se.
Saari maansik pareshaniyon se.
Shaaririk pareshaniyon se.
Sabse mukta ho jata hai.
Keval Kirtanadeva Krishnasya.
Krishnaka kirtan karke.
Koi aur kirtan nahi. Krishnaka kirtan.
Krishnasya.
Kirtanade. So very very clearly
it is mentioned. Kali. For Kali Yuga
what is the process.
Shrimad Bhagvatam saare shastro ka
nichod hai. Aur ye Shrimad Bhagvatam
Baarava skand hai. Shrimad Bhagvatam ka
concluding portion. Waha pe
is mentioned. Aur agar Bhagvat Gita
hum dekhe. Toh Bhagvat Gita me lika hai.
Yagyarthat
karmano anyatra loko yam
bhandana.
Humare saare karma humko yagya ke liye
karne chahiye.
Aur saare yagyon me sarve shrestha yagya
kaunsa hai. Yagya naam japa yagyon asmi.
I am the chanting of the holy
names. Japa. So Krishna kare hain.
Japa yagya jo hai. Toh top most
yagya hai saare yagyon me.
Toh hum jo ye japa kar rahe hain.
Sabse bada yagya hai. Keval
japa karne se pehle yagya karte theh
log baarish ke liye. Anaaj ke liye.
Saare material resources ke liye karna
zaruri hai. Toh jo japa yagya hai
wo humko kabhi bhi ismoot se nahi karna
chahiye ki humare bhot ek ichchaun ki
purthi ho. I want to fulfill my
material necessities. We should only
do as a seva. Bhagwan ne
naam ke roop me avtar diya hai.
Bhagwan mein aapka eternal relative hu.
Let me engage myself in your service.
Bhagwan ki seva karne ke liye japa karna
chahiye. Lekin automatically
yagya ke saare result humko
milenge japa karne se.
Automatically not just a person
advances spiritually, but all his
material necessities are also very well
taken care of. So Bhagwat Gita bhi
yahi cheez batatiye. Yagya naam japa
yagya masmi. Satatam
kirtayantu maam. Humne dekha 9
chapter verse no 14 me Krishna kate.
Hamesha kirtan japa karte raho mere naam
ka. So hum dekh rahe
shaastro mein har jage yahi reference hai.
Agar hum shaastro mein vedon mein
belief karte hain there is no other
way. Agar hum kisi dosre dharmein
belief karte hain then also there is no
other way. Islam, Sikhism
and Christianity
in all the bona fide religions
chanting of the holy names of God
on beads it is recommended.
Same process everywhere.
So there are simple do's and don'ts
not like ashtang yoga ki aapko
jungle mein jake and this thing but
simple things like
pancha tatva mantra you have to chant.
What is that mantra? I have shared on telegram channel
Sri Krishna Chaitanya Prabhu
Nityanand Sri Advaita Gadadhar Sri Vasadi
Gaur Bhakta Vrind. Ye karna
bahot zaroori hai. To jo humari galtiyan
hoti hain jap mein hab usse free ho jaate hain.
Bol bol ke jap karna hai
clearly pronounce karna hai naam
ko. Jaldi jaldi khatam karne
ke chakkar mein ki humko ek swath to karna hai.
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Hare Hare, Ram Ram,
Prabhu 3 minute mein mala ho gayi.
So aisa nahi karna hai. Aur Bhagwan
aur Bhagwan ke naam mein koi difference
nahi hai. So when we are chanting we have
to chant with great respect to I am receiving
Krishna. Krishna sound incarnation
with great devotion, love
with great concentration.
God has come I should be very very attentive
to receive this incarnation through my ears.
So with great respect
attention, devotion we
have to do this. Pronounce distinctly
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna,
Krishna, Krishna. Each word
we have to hear. Aur man mein nahi karna hai
bol bol ke karna hai
isko. Chant by keeping
count on mala. Preferably
chant after taking a bath
and in the morning Abraham
urta means before sunrise.
It starts around 90 minutes before sunrise.
So that is the ideal time.
However if you are not able to do
chant anytime. If you
are sick not able to take bath you can
do without it also. But if
you chant early morning after taking bath
chanting is much more effective.
If you can chant in temple it will be
1000 times more effective.
If you chant in Dham it will be 1000 times more effective.
If you chant in front of Tulsi
it will be 1000 times more effective.
If you have Tulsi plant
please keep a Tulsi plant in your house
offer some water, chant in front of Tulsi
chanting would be 1000 times more effective.
But nevertheless if these things are
not possible to arrange never
miss chanting. Chanting is always
effective. Some don'ts.
Don't chant only a portion
of the Mahamantra. Chant complete 16
words. Do not chant on the Krishna
bead. Krishna bead means
from where the threads are coming out.
We don't want to chant on this.
Next bead. And when the garland is complete
we turn it around.
We don't cross it. If we are finished
we turn it around and then we start
chanting the other way. So we never
jump over this bead. This is Krishna bead.
Do not chant
with one hand, WhatsApp
with one hand Hare Krishna. So
we are not attentive.
So newspaper, this thing
notification, nothing.
Please keep the eyes half
closed or fully closed.
No other distraction
at all. No input to any
of the senses. Completely
focus on each and every word till the
chanting is over. This chanting is
the basis of spiritual life.
So what are the benefits?
We get freedom from the reactions
of sin.
Whatever suffering is coming in our life
whether it is from
family or neighbors
whether we are suffering because
of our colleagues, boss
subordinates
or we are suffering because of the
government, some system or some other
insect, XYZ or some
disease. It is because we have committed
sin. We have broken the laws of nature.
So when we chant Hare Krishna
Maha Mantra, we should never pray for it.
We should simply chant to please Krishna
but automatically our sins will
go away. All the unwanted
habits. I am addicted
to smoking, drinking
or Netflix. All
the things will go away. We will get peace
of mind. You chant attentively
do service of Krishna immediately
peace of mind and not false
happiness of sense enjoyment which
frustrates and makes you more hungry.
Real experience, real happiness
will be experienced. All
anxiety and stress will go away.
People will ask
what are you doing?
What are you doing?
People will ask like this.
It is your age to do this. Enjoy it now.
We will do it later. You will fail in your
career. You will lose your job, lose your
business. No.
So many people, it is not
that we have to change our profession
we have to simply change our
consciousness. So killing is
not bad but you kill for the country
then you are a soldier. You will be respected.
Not that you have to stop killing people but
kill on the order of the government.
Even a killer becomes glorified. He is
called a soldier. So we need
not change our occupation or anything
but we have to do everything for the sake of
Krishna. That is Krishna consciousness.
So many successful people
in fact I have not seen a single
person failing even in his material
life who follows Krishna
consciousness very very nicely.
Sometimes Krishna may test of course but
otherwise the material life is also
automatically taken care.
George Harrison, former Beatle
he tells. So Beatles
were the first people to start
the rock music and he was
one among the four Beatles
and he was disciple of Srila Prabhupada
and he wanted to become a monk
but Prabhupada recommended him to follow from
outside. That is why he stayed outside.
Jean Claude, youngest director
of France. He tells everything started happening
for me when I began chanting Hare Krishna
immensely successful. He is Amrish
Prabhu. Now he is a little old. This is
his photograph when he was young.
He and his wife.
So he is proprietor of
Ford Motors. Ford is the
oldest automobile company of the world
and he is able to manage big
business and at the same time
he chants 16 rounds of Hare Krishna
Maha Mantra every day as Jean Claude
and as George Harrison
were doing. He also chants 16 rounds
and whatever money he earns he
does not enjoy for his own comfort.
He spends everything on construction of temples.
So this is called Bhakti Yoga
running an automobile company
at the same time following this.
Andy Desai, he passed away
couple of years ago. Very famous industrialist
of our country. He tells have never
found anything more pleasurable.
Vicky Overton, she was
the leading top most model
of Europe at that time.
And all the leading magazines
were vouching for her
were getting her interview everywhere
and she became a full time
devotee. Italy's top
furniture designer. He is most
famous. He is also chanting 16 rounds of
Hare Krishna Maha Mantra. David
Wood done research on Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
Great intellectual.
A person can be printing executive
or Mr. Mafat Lal
very famous industrialist of our country.
He is also chanting Hare Krishna. He is
disciple of Srila Prabhupada. Chanting
Hare Krishna Maha Mantra 16 rounds.
He and his wife. Both of them they chant
Hare Krishna Mantra every day. So all of them are
tremendously successful people.
Very, very advanced in their careers.
And they all chant 16 rounds of Hare Krishna
Mantra every day. So please don't
think you will have any loss if
you are sincerely chanting Hare Krishna
Krishna. I take
care. Only this faith is required.
So not that the person should be
loose but regulated in his life.
Don't become very greedy
that we don't even have time for chanting
hearing or reading Bhagavad Gita.
So this is my humble request to
all of you. If you have any questions
please feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please
feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please
feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please
feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please
feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please
feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please
feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please
feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please feel free to ask in the comment section below.
And if you have any questions please feel free to ask in the comment section below.
