"Today we are going to start 8th chapter of Bhagavad Gita. In the 7th chapter of Bhagavad Gita we discussed lord Krishna is explaining the topmost knowledge of Supreme Absolute Truth Himself. The chapter's name was Knowing the Absolute. Krishna explained about Himself what is this world? How is it related to me? What are the various energies of Krishna? What is living entity? So very beautifully. Krishna explained external energy. Bhumirapo Nalova yukamano buddhirevacha ahankarityam prakatirashtadha. These are eight energies. Just like in science, we understand there is gravitational field, electric field, but there is no clarity. There are different theories. There is a field theory, there is curvature theory. Various theories are there and they are trying to understand how the things are taking place in this world. So God Himself is telling that basically there are eight material energies and over and above that there are spiritual energies and there is one unique energy which is called Tata Shakti, which is called marginal potency. And that is the living entity. Living entity can choose either to remain mixed within this material world with these eight elements or it can choose to live in the spiritual atmosphere. And this living entity is eternal part and parcel of Krishna. So Lord Krishna explained, unless it is engaged in the service of Krishna in its original form, there is no satisfaction in life. And towards the end, Arjuna put forth few questions. Beg your pardon? Lord Krishna explained few things to Arjuna the crux of the knowledge of the Absolute Truth. So Krishna explained sadibu dadi daivam sadhiya vidhuhu prayanakali apichamam te viduryu saha So Krishna explains I am the basis of Adibut. I am the basis of all material ingredients, this material nature. I am the basis of all the demigods. I am the basis of all the sacrifices. And Krishna used some other terms brahma, Karma and all these things. So now in this chapter Arjuna is asking what are all these various things, technical terms you have used? Please explain this clearly to me. And after that Krishna reveals very important thing. Having knowledge of God is very important. What was there in the 7th chapter? But then how to meet God? How to see God? That is even more important. And that is called attaining the supreme. So that is what Lord Krishna explains in this chapter. Chapter number eight. So let us start with the first verse. Let us do the invocation prayers. Please try to hear with attention. O magyana temashalakaya chakshurun melitamyena tasma shri Gurave namah nam vishnu padaya krishna prashtaya Bhutale shrimate bhakti vedanta swamin itinamine namaste saraswat goruvani pracharine niravishun Pashatyadeshatarine j shri Krishna chaitanya prabhu nityananda sri advaita Gadadhara shivasadi gauravaktarinda hare krishna Hare krishna krishna Krishna. Hare hare hare Rama. Hare Rama. Ram him mukam karoti vaja lampangum langhayatambandes tapitam yanabhutali swayamru padamikam namo brahman. Jagatitai Krishna. Govinda Mushla. So let us see the first verse. It is somewhere. Hare Krishna. Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna hari. Hari. Hari. Ram hari. Ram ram ram. Hari. Hari. Hare Krishna Hari. Krishna krishna Krishna hari. Hari. So you can see the first verse. Attaining the supreme is a chapter. So people ask, show me God. Where is God? I want to see God. So yes, please read chapter number eight. In this chapter. Lord Krishna has explained how somebody can see God, meet God, talk with God and know everything about God. So very very important chapter. Let us try to hear all these instructions very carefully. Let us see verse number one. Kim karma Purushotama adibhutam Chakim praktam Adhid. So why this question is coming? Kim tad brahma kim adhyatmam kim karma Purushotama because in the previous chapter, Lord Krishna explained jara marana mokshai mam ashriti yatantitehu kritnam adhyatmam karma chakhilam jara marana mokshai Those people who have taken shelter of me mam ashritya to become free from the process of birth and death brahmatad vidhu kritnam they are brahma and they know completely what is self, what is fruitive activity. What are karma? So spiritual material activities they have complete knowledge of it. So Krishna explained, those who are surrendered unto Me. So these words were used. They are brahma. They know the self, they know what is Karma. So now Arjuna is asking, please explain it to me clearly. Because there is confusion. Many people tell Atma is this, Atma is that. As per the Sanskrit dictionary, Atma has got many meanings mind, body, soul, senses, intelligence, super soul. So what is the meaning of this Brahm? What exactly it is? Is it senses? Is it body? So Arjuna is asking Krishna, please explain me clearly. What is soul? Like? Many people ask what is soul? Please explain same question Arjuna is asking here for clarity. What is this Karma? People tell we have to do Karma. And this Karma has got some reaction. What is this activity? Arjuna inquired. Oh, my Lord. O supreme person. What is brahma? What is self? What are fruitive activities? What is this material manifestation? And what are the demigods? Please explain this to me. Next, Arjuna asks Adhiyagya Katham koatra dehyasmin manus Madhusudana. How does this Lord of sacrifice live in the body? And in which part does he live? O Madhusudana? And how can those engaged in devotional service know you at the time of death? So these are very important questions. So these are the things which a living entity is supposed to inquire. And most importantly, the last question prayan kale chakatham gayo ASI niyatma VI so Srila Prabhupada explains here now the word Prayad Kale in this verse is very significant. Because whatever we do in life will be tested at the time of death. Arjuna fears that at the time of death those who are in Krishna consciousness will forget the supreme Lord. Because at such a time body functions are disrupted and the mind may be in a panic stricken state. So it is told, unless the living entities and we can also experience some people are very very sick in the hospital. But still they don't want to die. They are somehow willing to survive and stay on. So unless there is lot of pain created in the body, that is why it is told in the vedas. So nobody can measure it, only the person can know it. But because God has created death and vedas are coming from God the experience of a person at the time of death is given in the vedas. It is many, many thousands. The exact number is also given. I don't remember exactly but thousands of scorpions biting together at the same time, one scorpion, if it bites so it is very very painful. Body starts shaking and stinging of thousands of scorpions together at the same time. It is extremely painful. So unless such great pain is created in the body, the living entity is so much attached, it does not want to leave the body. Although the body may be practically destroyed, not fit to continue. But the living entity does not want to live, wants to stay on. So thus Arjuna is asking prayan Kale at the time of death how will it be possible? Because there is so much pain, little pain. If it is there, we forget Krishna. So that is why the entire Vedic civilization is designed so that we can have a very peaceful life. Unless the life is peaceful, it is difficult to remember Krishna at all times. So the Varnashrama system is there. If a society is established in Varnashrama, then very very peacefully they can continue their activities and thus they will be happy. And when the person is peaceful happy, he can easily remember Krishna. So otherwise, if the mind is always disturbed, it is very very difficult to keep Krishna especially when there is disease, there is lot of pain, fever and all these things are at their maximum level at the time of death. That is where Srila Prabhupada quotes here there was great king Kulashekhar you would have read in the history chola dynasty, Pandya Chera dynasty, so Cheera dynasty was there and he is very famous. King Kulashekhar came in the recent times and King Kulashekhar was a pure devotee of Krishna and one of the most exalted revered saints of the Sri Sampradaya. So King Kulashekhar was although he was a king but he was a pure devotee and he offers very wonderful prayers which Prabhupada often quotes. Mukunmala Stotra is the name. So he has composed this beautiful verse. So he's telling now krishna, I am very fit, so let me die immediately now that I am in healthy state so that the son of my mind may enter into the stem of thy lotus feet. Prana Prayana Samaye kafavata Pitai Kantha Varodhan Vidha Smaranam Kutaste so this science was known to everybody that at the time of death I have to remember Krishna. So how to remember Krishna at the time of death? Kanthavarodhan kapavata pitai. Kaphavat pita and all these things they create very difficult situation. All the bodily elements are disturbed. Your throat would be choked greatly. You will not be able to chant the name of Krishna even if you want. The heat will be there in the body. It would be very hot and many other disturbances could be there. So Kulashekhar is telling how will I remember you at the time of death? So now my health is good. So I am able to absorb myself in the thought of your lotus feet. So let me leave my body now. Let me die immediately. So Arjuna is fearing at the time of death those who are in Krishna consciousness will forget the Supreme Lord because all the bodily functions are disrupted and mind is also very disturbed. So therefore Arjuna is willing to ask please let me know how is it possible to remain fixed on your lotus feet at such time. So that Lord Krishna will answer in this chapter that how is it possible that in such a difficult situation also a person does not forget the lotus feet of Krishna? Shri bhagavanu vaja aksharam brahma paramam sabha vodhyatma muchyate bhuta bhavodh bhavakaro visarga karma sanghitah. The Supreme Lord said so Krishna is answering his questions now. Aksharam Brahma Paramam the indestructible transcendental living entity is called Brahma and his eternal nature is called the self. Action pertaining to the development of these material bodies is called Karma or fruitive activities. Brahm is indestructible and eternally existing and its constitution is not changed at any time. So this is the definition of Brahma. So what is brahm? What is the spirit? People tell spirit is existing because of matter. There is certain combination of the chemicals and thus consciousness arises. But here Lord Krishna is telling another definition. The supreme scientist he's telling no, Brahm is not the effect of matter something which is indestructible. The body is destroyed and thus people conclude consciousness also will not be there. Consciousness also destroys with the body. But Krishna is telling no. The indestructible transcendental living entity is called Brahma. The living entity cannot be destroyed and it is transcendental to matter. It is unaffected by matter and that is called Brahma. And its eternal nature is called the self, what is called Atma, the Brahm everyone is the spirit soul and there is certain nature of that spirit soul that is called Atma. So Atma in real sense is not the senses, is not the body, is not the mind but the nature of that Brahm that spark which is present within the body. An action pertaining to the development of these material bodies is called Karma or fruitive activities. So people are very fond of doing Karma. I want to continue doing Karma but they don't understand what is this Karma? Bhutubhavod Bhava Karha Karma it is explained here bhutubhav Udhavah that action which produces a body that is called Karma. So all the problems are only because of this body. This body is not required for enjoyment, even though this body is inactive. But still in the dream, a person is eating, sleeping, eating, talking, even sleeping at times. All the actions can be performed without this body in the dream platform. Similarly, on the spiritual platform, without any disturbance by these physical problems a person can continue to act. So thus this physical body is not at all required. Rather, this physical body puts limitation upon the spirit soul and as long as the living entity is engaged in doing Karma, he will keep on producing newer and newer bodies. Thus, the aim of life is to stop the cycle of Karma and become free from the reactions which it produces. Adibutam sharohavah purushas chadi daivitam adhiyagyoham avatra dehe deha pritamvara. Now Krishna is explaining what is Adibhut? That means physical nature. Physical nature is known to be endlessly mutable. The universe in the cosmic form of the Supreme Lord is the cosmic form of the Supreme Lord. And I am that Lord represented as the super soul dwelling in the heart of every embodied being. Srila Prabhupada explains the physical nature is constantly changing. So what is physical nature? Arjuna is asking. So Krishna is explaining physical nature is that which is constantly changing. This is in contrast with the spiritual nature. Brahm brahm means which is never changing and something which is ever changing. That is physical nature. So spiritual nature means never changing and material nature means ever changing. It will keep on changing. Take one from one form to another form, endlessly mutable. Physical nature is constantly changing. Material bodies generally pass through six stages. They are born, they grow, they remain for some duration, they produce some byproducts, they dwindle and then they vanish. This physical nature is called Adhibhutam because it is created at certain point and will be annihilated at a certain point. The conception of universal form of the Supreme Lord that includes all the demigods and different planets is called aridhevatam. The individual soul accompanies the body. The super soul, a plenary representation of the Lord krishna is called Parmatma or Adhiyagya and is situated in the heart. The word Eva is particularly important in the context of this verse because by this word the Lord stresses that the Parmatma is non different from Him. The super soul, the supreme personality of Goddess seated beside the individual soul, is the witness of the individual soul's activities and is the source of consciousness. So here Krishna is explaining about the Yajna purusha. Human life is meant only for doing yajna yajna thaat karmano anyatra loko yam karma bandhanah. So now somebody may ask yes, understood. All the problem is because of this body. The body is giving diseases, body is suffering from death, body is suffering from body needs maintenance, body has various demands. So I have to work very hard to satisfy the body and the body is never satisfied. So all the problems are because of this body. And to get rid of body. What is producing this body so very nicely? Arjuna is asking right question. So Krishna answers yes, it is the Karma which is producing body. So then how to get rid of Karma? That is also answered in the bhagavad. Gita yajna karmano anyatra loko yam karma bandhana. The Karma should only be done for sacrifice for Yajna. Otherwise Karma will keep on producing material bodies. It will entangle you in this world. So these people do not know. All the actions should be done only for Yajna. Only for sacrifice the results a person is not supposed to enjoy. You work very hard, produce the result and then sacrifice the result. So here Arjuna is asking for whom are we sacrificing it? Because there is confusion. There are various Devi Devatas mentioned. But if a person reads carefully the Vedas, the Yagyipurusha when it comes to the main personality although portion is given to various Devatas. So two names are there. One is that of Indira, another is that of Lord Vishnu. So Arjuna is seeking Clarification. Who is Yajna Purusha? Actually human life is meant for sacrifice. For whom should we sacrifice the results of our so? And it is also understood that that Lord of sacrifice is residing within the heart. It is there within the body. God is there in the heart. We tell so who is that God and how is he living in this body? So that Krishna is telling adi Yagyo aham eva ATRA dehe dehe britamvara. So Krishna is telling Adhi Yagya that person who is sustaining all the sacrifices who is to be pleased by all the sacrifices? Aham Eva ATRA Aham Eva. Eva means certainly Krishna is asserting that is Me. Only for me all the sacrifices should be done. And I am living in this body along with the individual soul. So this goes along with the definition of there are three entities which are mentioned in the Christianity. The Trinity, God, the Holy Ghost and the soul. So this Holy Ghost which they call it is called the super soul. So Krishna is there and there is another they call Holy Ghost. It is ghost. It is present in subtle form. But it is always accompanying the individual soul. So that is called super soul. So here Krishna is telling I am situated in the heart and that is me only. All the work should be sacrificed for me for my pleasure. Because the aim of life is to develop love of God. When you sacrifice the results for somebody you develop love for that person. However it may not be possible for everyone to understand the spiritual existence of God. That is why many people they ask question please show me how he is, where he is present, what is his form? But they don't understand. I am there, stuck in this material body which is designed to perceive only matter that to under certain conditions. Only when there is sunrise there is some artificial light, I can perceive this world in a certain way. Unless there is light, I cannot see the world. So this world is perceivable by me under some very strict conditions. How is it possible to understand spirit soul who is beyond the body? So those people who are not able to understand the spiritual existence, the Parmatma form of God, so then they are recommended to worship the universal form of the god, which is called adhi devam. So what is this adhi Devam? Universal form. So it is very easy to understand for most of the people in a religious society that the body is sustaining because of the presence of consciousness. As soon as consciousness is out all the other organs, all the other chemicals are same in the body. The blood is there. Everything is there. But the body cannot be maintained. It perishes as soon as the consciousness is out of the body. So presence of consciousness is required to maintain the body and the presence of consciousness is required to maintain any system. In this material creation. If consciousness is not there, no system can be maintained. Similarly, in this universe also we see various systems. Just like our body is there in our body many many living entities are there many worms? Are there so many worms? It is told when the embryo is there in the womb of the mother, it develops. And the child when it gains some consciousness, it is very much disturbed by the biting of the insects in the womb. Now of course they give some medicines and to kill the insects. But otherwise so many insects are there in the stomach and that is why they take the nourishment. Sometimes when the stomach cleaning is not happening properly, then just like outside, if there is something getting rotten, insects will come out of it. Similarly, insects germinate automatically when there is no proper digestion in the stomach and tapeworms. And so many other dangerous things are there and they start eating the food that we eat and the person does not get nourished. So like this so many worms are there, so many living entities are there. And what to speak of these other big worms and living entities? Every cell of the body is a living entity. The cell undergoes these six changes which are mentioned in the beginning of this purport. The cell also takes birth. It grows, it divides itself byproducts are there, maintains itself. Then it dwindles and it vanishes. So every cell is a living entity. Cell eats, cell has defense mechanism, metabolism everything is there. But the arrangement in the body for proper maintenance of the cells will be there. As long as there is this prime soul present within the body then all these souls can function. Similarly, all of us, the living entities are functioning within this universe because there is another prime source. All pervading consciousness present somewhere within the universe. Thus there is proper rising of sun, setting of sun, proper distance, proper motion of planets, proper living entities. Some of them are producing oxygen, some of them are inhaling oxygen, some of them they release CO2. Other. They take CO2. In this way it is very very nicely the same biotic management is there this food chain? Is there one living entity? Jivo jivasi jivanam it is food for another living entity. In this way, wonderfully. This cycle is going on. Balance is happening in the nature. So any system needs consciousness. So those people who are not able to understand what is that consciousness, where is that consciousness? But at least they can understand there is some consciousness. And just like the body develops because of the presence of individual consciousness, this universe has developed because of the presence of that all pervading universal consciousness. And in order to fix the mind upon God, they cannot perceive the spiritual form of the God. So meditation upon this adhi Daivaha adi Daivam the universal form of Lord is recommended for the Neophytes. So they meditate upon the universe and how to meditate upon the universe? How to develop attachment? It is difficult to get attached to a dead thing. Why we get attached to the bodies of the people around us? Because of the presence of soul. When the soul is out, you cannot attach yourself to a dead body. Because of the presence of soul. The body appears to be living, the bodies appears to have a life. So we get attached to the bodies here. So we can get attached only to persons, not to impersonal thing or objects like that. So how to get attached to the universe? So there is this concept given to them that is called the conception of universal form. So yes, it is a fact. This universe is a body. And just like the individual soul develops, expands itself as this material body. When Garvodakshai Vishnu enters the universe, the universe starts expanding. And all these trees, rivers, glaciers and winds and planets, they all start their activity, they start moving their orbits and everything happens. The system continues to exist as long as paramatma super soul God is present in this universe. So this universe is also expansion of God's body, garba Dakshai Vishnu. But it is difficult to get attached to something which is not person, which is not in the form of a person. So that is why universal conception is given. You imagine this universe is there in the form of a person, a very huge person. And the lower planets, they are the legs of that universal form, virat Rupa Virat Purush and the sun and the moon, they are the eyes of that virat purush. The mountains, they are the bones of that Virat purush. And the rivers, they are the arteries, veins of that Virat purush. So in this way, whenever seeing all these forms, material forms, it is easy. Even though a person cannot understand, put faith in the spiritual form. So very easily he can see the mountains. And then as soon as he sees the mountain he thinks oh, these are the bones of the body of God. If he's seeing trees, grasses and herbs, he thinks so these are hairs on the body of the Lord. So entire universe imagines in the form of a person. So that is called universal form of the Lord. The virat purusha. So all the devatas, they are also part of the body of this universal form of God. But this is only recommended for the Neophytes. Those who cannot see, understand the spirit. Just like those people who have no knowledge of who the president is. And they can understand president only from the cavalcade which is coming. There is a unique car. There are unique bodyguards and entourage and band party. And then they understand who president is coming now. But some people are there who actually know who the president is. They need not understand president by this external arrangement. So those who are very new by this external arrangement only they are able to appreciate God. But Krishna is telling sadhi Dhaivam Sadi Bhutam Maam so I am the basis of that virat rupa, that universal form that this universe is existing because of my presence. So when the devotee advances further then he is able to meditate upon the super soul. And when he advances even further he understands the super soul is also coming from Krishna. And then he meditates upon Krishna. So these are the various stages of meditation. And somebody who cannot understand even this concept that the soul is required, the consciousness is required to maintain any material system in this world. Then for such people other religions are there. Just like Buddhism is there. There is no understanding of soul. So as some devotee was telling me that there is discussion in their scriptures somebody's asking disciple is asking the Lord, Lord Buddha. So does the soul exist? So he's telling no, I did not say that the soul exists. So soul does not exist. So then he's telling, I did not say the soul doesn't exist either does God exist? I did not say God existed. Oh, God. Does not exist. I didn't say he never existed. So like these answers are given. So what is the goal of life? The goal of life? A person who knows, he will not tell. And who is telling, he does not know. So very ambiguous answers would be given because Lord Buddha explained the very basic common sense concepts to the people. So all these concepts are easy to understand, appreciate for the people who are pious, who don't break the laws of nature. Those who are involved in so much of giving pain to other living entities, animal killing, this common sense is not there that other living entities suffering from pain. Why should I give so much pain to others simply for satisfaction of my tongue? So when this basic sense is not there what a living entity will understand soul and adhiyagyam and the basis, the material ingredients, the design, engineering of the universe. So there is no point of explaining these things. So that is why for them the negation principles are explained in the religion. So here you will see that positives are given more important importance. You chant, you meditate, you do this thing, do do that Swadhya and XYZ various positive activities are encouraged. But there ahinsa parmoodharma, do not do hintsa, do not do violence. That is the topmost religion. Do not do this, do not steal, do not covet, do not be greedy, do not, do not, do not so, do not engage in impious activities. This is the first stress which is given. So to those people who cannot even appreciate this thing that this universe is expansion of the supreme consciousness and thus I can meditate upon the universe in the universal form. For them other religions and all these things are mentioned. So all the various religions which are present, they are stepping stones towards this ultimate understanding of the personality of God. So the saniya fight is recommended. You cannot understand super soul, so you can meditate upon this universal form. This is what Krishna explains here. But then he also asserts I am the basis of that universal form. Then Lord Krishna mentions antikale chamamaran Mukhtvakalevaram YAF Prayati Samadhavam yati Nasti ATRA San Shayah and whoever at the time of death quits his body, remembering me alone at once attains my nature. Of this there is no doubt. So at the time of death how a person will be able to understand Krishna? So Krishna is beginning to explain here and Krishna is telling what is the result? Why should you even think of thinking me at the time of death? So Krishna is telling because Krishna has explained his nature in the previous chapter. What is the nature of Krishna's bodyam? Non perishable. So if you also want a body which is unborn, which is non perishable, which is permanent, which is free of diseases, free of lamentation, which is full of knowledge, all the bodies are born with certain knowledge and the spider is born with the knowledge of making cobweb. If the same substance is given to us which is there with the spider, we cannot make cobweb. But the spider knows the knowledge. The bird knows how to make nest, how to gather proper ingredients for making nest. The honeybees, they know how to detect the proper flower, how to take out the nectar, how to make honeycomb in which I can store this nectar, store this honey cubic, close, pack arrangement. So all these things are very wonderfully known to the bees but it is not known to us. So various sciences, various knowledge is given to various living entities here from birth. Just like we were discussing frog. Frog knows the art of Kumbhak yoga. Just imagine the yogis have. To do so much of learning advancement. Then they can practice Kumbhak yoga. But there are numerous instances where the frogs are coming out of stones. Completely sealed stones from all sides. So there is a pastime of those who are from south. They must be knowing. I think it is Chanakishava temple. Please correct me if I am right. So there Sripad Ramana Jacharya he once went and once deity installation ceremony was supposed to happen. So he went there and by seeing he told this deity is not all right because there is this living entity in the stomach of the deity. And eventually they discovered. They opened it and then the frog jumped out immediately. So then he gave few more years. You construct another deity. This was unfit. So he was able to figure out like this many many instances are there. The frog insignificant small living entity is very expert in the art of Kumbhaki yoga. By neutralizing the breathing cycles and thus he can elongate his lifespan. So thus every living entity is born with certain knowledge. But if the living entity gets spiritual body, then he's having full knowledge, complete knowledge. So the living entity is having complete knowledge in the spiritual body. And it is full of happiness. And there is no death in that body. This is the nature of Krishna's body. So Krishna is telling whoever at the time of death quits his body. Remembering me alone at once attains my nature sanchaya of this there is no doubt. So just like now these bodies are given to us. We did not choose the body. Otherwise we would have chosen the best body. The most intelligent body, the most handsome body, the strongest body. Somehow this body was imposed upon us. Similarly, there is a possibility always that next body will be given to us unless we are liberated. So we should be very careful. What would be my next body? How to do right activities so that I get the best body and which is the best body? Body like Krishna. That is possible when at the time of death we quit the body remembering Krishna and how does it happen? So Lord Krishna explains in the next verse this is the law of transmigration. Very very important. These people do not know at all. This science is not known. So Krishna explains this law. Yam Yamvapi Smaran Bhavam Tiyajatyante, Kalevaram, Tamta, Meva, Kante Sadhad bhava Bhavitah Yamyamvapi whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he will attain without fail. So whatever state one remembers when he quits his body, that state or that nature, he will attain without fail. Sadhat bhava Bhavitah the process of changing one's nature at the critical moment of death is here explained. How can one die in the proper state of mind? Maharaj bharat thought of a deer at the time of death and so was transferred to that form of life. However, as a deer, Maharaj bharat could remember his past activities. So here it is being explained. At the time of death, whatever a person thinks. So Bharat Maharaj, although he was advanced, but at the time of death he was absorbed in the thoughts of dear. So thus he got a dear body. So somebody can tell it is very nice. I've known this formula now. So let me enjoy my life, do whatever I want in life, break all the laws of nature and at the time of death I will think of Krishna and my life would be successful. No need to follow anything. So no, it is not possible because it is being explained further. Of course, the cumulative effect of the thoughts and actions of one's life influence one's thoughts at the moment of death. Therefore, the actions of this life determine one's future state of being. If one is transcendentally absorbed in Krishna's service, then its next body will be transcendental spiritual, not physical. Therefore, the chanting of Hare Krishna is the best process for successfully changing one's state of being to transcendental life. So at the time of death, the entire life passes in a flash in our memory. So whatever activities we have done predominantly those activities will dominate our thoughts. At the time of death. There is not much time. Within a flash the entire life comes in front of us. So there it is not possible to apply brain, apply intelligence. So whatever we have practiced in entire life, if entire life a person has developed this practice, how to meditate on Krishna always, then naturally at the time of that it will be possible. Otherwise it is not possible. So this is the basis of the entire education that people were having in the Vedic culture in India. This is the basis of all the drama, all the arts, all the music, all the poetry, all the literature, all the festival. How to have Krishna through every medium. All the literatures would be based on Krishna history. Also those instances are there in which Krishna's pastimes are involved. We are not bothered about general history. There are two histories. Ramayan and Mahabharat Puranas are also history. They are very old history. So either you consider very old history puranas. So only those instances are recorded where activities of God are mentioned. When he manifests in our physical material dimensions and he does some activity, those things are recorded. And people are interested in politics, in drama, in action. So in Mahabharata Rama and all these things are mentioned. But ultimately so that a person can come to remembrance of God. Lord Rama, Lord Krishna these activities are there, all the festivals are there, they are around God. All the music is there, drama is there, everything poetry, it is always about God because people are knowing this thing. Whatever you do ultimately end of life, you should have ante Narayana Smriti you should be absorbed in the thoughts of God Krishna Narayan at the time of death. So thus this very important law we do not know now people in ignorance, they are getting attached to animals. And what degradation that people are having their attachment every day being redegraded to further lower and lower species. Earlier they were having some other advanced animals, then it became dog, then cats. Now people are petting rats and frogs and whatnot. So how horrible the life is going to be, they cannot imagine. So if they are attached to animals, especially when the family members are no longer there this is the culture in the western western civilization is totally reverse and horrible civilization. They are doing everything which is not supposed to be done. Everything they would do reverse. They would eat a food that is not fit for eating. That is the American doctor was very angry. He's telling what is American population 5%, 10%, whatever he told of the world. But they consume 60% of medicines of the world. 60% or 80% somewhere around that. So 5% of the population is consuming 60% medicines, even if going by conservative figures of the world. So what is this advancement he's telling we have made? So they are also realizing that we have made totally reverse civilization. So now when the family members are not there, then they have some animals and all the attachment they pour upon the animals thinking about animals, they are becoming animals. So some devotee, they approach Prabhupada, that Prabhupada people are killing animals. So in our magazine we should raise this issue, they should not kill animals and a lot of cruelty is happening. So this is what a neophyte or an ordinary person will think oh, so much cruelty is happening to animals, I should stop it. And they would raise a movement to stop animal killing like that. However, the vision of transcendentalists a pure devotee, a man of knowledge is very different and universal. So Prabhupada told why should we raise issue or voice against a certain section of society who are killing a certain kind of or kinds of animals? Actually in that way, if you have to criticize, if you have to raise your voice, then you have to criticize everybody. Because everybody's killing, especially the human beings, all the human beings who are dying, that is killing Atmaha to this human form of life. If you follow the rules and regulations properly, we are supposed to become immortal. But rather than following that, we have deviated of the path and we are causing our own death. Now the society is further degraded. What is this advancement of education that we have had that the suicides are only increasing in number and now they are having loneliness, ministry and so many other things. Depression has become very common. And even though there is no depression, no loneliness, nothing, no suicide still if a person is not making himself immortal, if a person is not following this principle lantakala Chamamas Maran Mukhtva Kalevaram he is not able to absorb himself in the thoughts of God at the time of death. So any civilization which does not promote constant absorption in the thoughts of God and thinking about him especially at the time of death it is a soul killing civilization. So then we should criticize each and every person on the planet. And not just death they are degrading human being to very very dangerous, very lowest forms of the species. So that is why an ignorant man will do this thing. He will raise work very hard for a movement to do something save animals. And then because he has been always thinking about the animal he also will become animal in the next birth. And all these human beings meanwhile he is living like animal. He is raising his voice against animal. But what is his life? He is doing smoking and he is drinking. He is doing lot of illicit sex. All these volunteers of such organizations they mix together. Because the main enjoyment is boys and girls mixing together. And then there is illicit sex. So if you are doing illicit sex and saving animal you only will become animal in the next life. So yes we are not criticizing. We should save animals. It is very important. We should have compassion. But then we should understand that what is actually safety of animal. And these human beings you save them first from becoming animals. So animal even if you work very very hard. Yes animals should not be killed in that sense we should have the compassion. But it is very very important to do the main work upon the human beings. Because animal how much ever hard you can work animal cannot become immortal. So animal should be taken care as God's part and parcel God's son. But it is very very important to spend all one's energy in educating the human being. If you educate a human being to think about God automatically he will understand all the living entities are part and parcels of God. He will not just not disturb animals but he himself will become immortal. So that is why there is no need to get agitated by these temporary movements or some sentimental things which are happening in ignorance. So the most grievous killing which is happening is that of billions of people, human beings on this planet who have chance to become immortal. But because of not knowing the science they are killing themselves life after life. So this very important verse, this is the principle. Whatever we remember at the time of death that state, that nature, that body we will attain without fail. So at the time of death now how remember Krishna. It is not easy when the situations are disturbed. What should we do so that we don't forget Krishna. That is the entire explanation in this chapter. So that we will see please hear very carefully all these verses what Lord Krishna is explaining."