"So we wish to learn the art of dying. No, no, Prabhu, please don't. I don't want to lie on we are living actually, please teach us art of living if you can. Why you are teaching us art of dying? We have just begun our life. So actually that is the nature of this material world. Material world means the world which is made up of matter in which we are currently occupying the places the soul is merged in this matter. So one very unique feature of this material world is that of relativity or duality. Duality means, as we discussed previously, happiness and distress, they are synonymous. What we are considering happiness is same as distress. There are two sides of the same coin. The same object which gives us happiness it is going to give us distress. The same sun is the cause of happiness in winters and the same sun is the cause of stress the same water is the source of happiness in the summers and the same water becomes source of distress in the winter season. The same loving affairs are the source of great ecstasy and they are the source of great misery as well. Our jobs, we take them as source of happiness but at the same time we understand they are the source of misery as well. So this is the nature of this material world. The same competition gives you happiness and gives you stress. So those who are satisfied somehow in this mixed up situation of happiness and distress that class is not considered very intelligent. So thus another great duality which exists in this world is that of life and death. So here living and dying are synonymous. How? Synonymous? No? Yes, if we carefully analyze, it is synonymous. So what we called actually as dying, let us analyze. Suppose a person is there who has got shot and that person is gasping for breath and then some news reporters would come and then they would see, just see the person is dying and everyone around him would believe that actually he is dying. Please help him. The person is dying. So why we are calling that he is dying? He or she is dying. Actually he is living. So dying means he is going to die. He's about to die. That is the meaning of dying. Dying means going to die. So actually if you see, we are all going to die any moment of time, short while or long time. But it is a fact that we are all going to die. So that is why actually we are dying. That is a grim reality of this material world. Actually we are dying every moment and the final change is called death. So we can call ourselves that we are living but actually we are also dying. We are going to die. So as soon as somebody is detected a very severe disease or stage four cancer, we call he or she is dying. Why because it assured that they are not going to live. So that way, if you analyze, all of us have got cancer, all of us have got this disease, we are all going to die. But such reality does not strike us. That is why when the Yaksha asked Yodhistir Maharaj, he was asking various questions in Mahabharata, he told, if you answer perfectly, I'll bring your brothers back to life. So one question was what is the most surprising thing? What is the biggest wonder of this world? Most surprising thing of this world? So you told the biggest wonder is yudhishthi maharaj replied Ahani Ahani Bhutani gachanti Yamalayam sheisham's Thawaram ashcharayam Atahaparam Ahani Ahani Bhutani honey means day. Every other day we see that living entities gachanti Yamalayam they are going to Yamaraja's abode they are embracing deaths, but sheisham's Thawaramichanti but those who are there who have not died yet, they are thinking we will always live here eternally. Kim Asharyam Atahaparam what is greater wonder than this? That people are not at all concerned that they are going to die and they are going to take another birth, but they are satisfied. Another example is given, just like the goats are there. So maybe you would not have experienced those people who have experienced some kind of slaughter somewhere. So there's a very striking understanding from this material nature that the goats are tied together. One goat is taken out and in front of the other goats, that goat is slaughtered. But the other goats are not at all disturbed. Why? Because some green grass is fed to them. They are very busy eating the grass. So one goat is being slaughtered, but the other goat is not at all somehow concerned, and it is eating grass very nicely. This called goat's mentality. But had a human being there in place of goat, the human being would have done either two things. He would have tried to save the fellow human if he can, or at least he can save his life, he would try to run away somehow. He cannot be satisfied. But that is what is happening unfortunately now with all of us. So the intelligence has gone to the level of goats and animals, that a person is simply satisfied with some temporary comforts of life and the man is not noticing that actually I am going to die. So that is why the vedas, it is mentioned very nicely, as we have discussed many times when Vishwamitra met Maharaj Dashrath so Maharaj Dashrath asked this thing. He is knowing what is the aim of this life, especially these saintly persons, the Sadhus, the Sanyasis, what they are working upon. So he asked the very relevant question. Ayastam yatat punar. Janma Jayayaya. We meet any student. So we asked him how is preparation for exam going on? If he's preparing for some exam, that is the usual question how is your job going on? If you meet a person, how is the business going on. If you ask a businessman similarly what question should be asked to saintly people? Ayistam yatat punar Janma Jaya punar Janma another Janma will happen, another birth will happen or another dying will happen. As soon as we take birth, our death is born along with the birth. So what we celebrate as a moment of great enjoyment. Actually that same moment has written a great misery on our forehead and that is a misery of death. That is the nature of this material world. So this is very painful cycle. As soon as you take birth, the misery of death is fixed like this. Any kind of enjoyment you try to relish the misery comes tied along with that. So that is why this cycle has to be won over. Punar Janma jayaya there is a situation possible where there is only living and there is no dying. That situation is called sanatana situation. And the prescribed rules, regulations, science and philosophy which takes us to that position of eternal life and never death, that is called Sanatana dharma janma jayaya how is your effort going on to win over this process of birth and death? So entire civilization was conscious oh, I should do this thing. Mokshpati snakes and ladders are called means I have to get liberation. So I have to follow the ladder. Then I can quickly achieve liberation. Those are the virtues and I have to be wary of the snakes. They are the vices, lust, anger, greed and so many other things. A similar question was also asked by Parikshit Maharaj. So an intelligent person can put forth such questions. A person who is not intelligent like a child does not think why my father is going somewhere to the office every day. But even though he's seeing that his father is going to office but the child wants to keep on playing. He is not willing to think that I will grow up and then I have to maintain family. For maintaining family, prerequisites are there for that. I have to study nicely. But the child is not at all conscious and he cries I don't want to go to school because intelligence is very very less. So parishit Maharaj very wise man. The wisest man because he was the king of the planet he also got this curse that he is going to die in seven days. And they all know that yes, the aim of life is liberation. So parishit Maharaj immediately goes on the bank of Ganges because all the sages saintly persons live there. So that he can understand. Now only seven days are left. How can I perfect my life in seven days? It is very very short span of time. So if you have two years, you know two years I will cover syllabus in this way and crack the examination. Suppose you've got only a month left so how to prepare? Then you need very expert guidance. I have only one month left and I am here. I am studying just to crack the examination. Similarly, the purpose of our life is nothing but to win over the process of death. Nothing else. Do not die. Amritam gama gamaya Go towards immortality tam somsoma Jyotir Gamaya rise from the platform of darkness. This material universe is dark. It needs external illumination to the platform of light. So the only purpose of human life is to win over this process of repeated birth and death. Thus Parikshit Maharaj was very much perplexed. I have only seven days left now what to do? So then he goes to the bank of Ganges and there he meets Shukdea Goswami. Shukdev Goswami is a personality who is liberated from birth and thus all the other sages present there unanimously they accepted. Oh yes, he should be the person who should be guiding you. Saul were knowing some process and they were trying to perfect this process. But every process takes a lot of time. So in seven days what we can apply? So that Shukhda Goswami parishit Maharaj asked Shukdya Goswami. And then Shukdea Goswami, he gives this beautiful answer. Shukdea Goswami mentions first of all the question which you have asked is very very nice. Atma vis samatha Punsam and it is only such a person can ask this question who is perfectly realized about the constitution of soul. Who understands that I am not the body. This body is a machine. These machines are going on. I will pick up another machine. And this entering into machine is not a very good business. I should continue to exist without these machines on platform of spiritual happiness. So only wise people will ask this question. So he congratulates him for asking the right question. And then he tells Variana Krito Lok hitam Nirpah and my dear king, this question is very nice because it is relevant for everybody, is for everyone's benefit. Because not just you, everyone is going to die. So everyone should be asking what is my duty, what should I do? What is a way of dying? Because death is anyway certain. So how should I prepare for death? That is why if we call it that we want to learn the art of living then we are living in a utopian hallucinatory situation. Oh yes, we are going to live always. So let me learn the art of living. You will not continue to live always, but you are going to die for sure. So that is why we should rather not call it art of living but art of dying. Although living and dying are both synonymous. So actually there is no living here, there is only death here. Living happens on the platform of spirituality, spiritual platform. And even though you can consider this living, also still living and dying are synonymous. So we should always replace the word wherever we use the word living by the word dying. Let's say we say living conditions. Living conditions are not good here. So just replace it with the word dying and then you will understand how actually those things should be perceived. So if somebody is telling living conditions are not good here, I want to improve my living conditions. So he is actually telling, I want to improve my dying conditions. Dying conditions are not good here. Will any person worry about his dying conditions? He should be worrying about his death. Oh, I am suited booted nicely and nicely, peacefully in this atmosphere I want to die. No, I don't want to die at all. So people are if somebody tells I'm working very hard to improve my dying conditions, then he's a foolish man. And then people say, oh, Mumbai cost of living is very high. So replace the word living with dying. So cost of dying is very high in Mumbai. Yes, actually that is reality. In small cities, death is not very expensive, very peacefully, limited hours in the office you have to spend and you don't have to work very hard. So the cost of death is less. So cost of dying is very high in metro cities. So just put the word dying wherever we are using living and then we will understand the reality of this world. So death although is a fear factor for the materialist. And still in great illusion. He is not at all concerned. He cannot even think. He is not at all having the urge to solve this problem of life. But a spiritualist takes it as an examination. Just like a child is very, very conscious. He's always conscious of the examination. But he is not scared of the examination. He's waiting for the right situation. Daskin Kulashekar tells now my mind is completely absorbed in your lotus feet. But at the time of death kafavata pitai kantha varodhan withHouse Maranam Kutaste so at the time of death, if I am not able to remember you, then my life is waste. So this king is perfectly aware what is this life? Death is sure and how to prepare for death. So as we discussed in the previous session, preparation for death is yam yamva piranhavam tiyajati ante kalevaram. Whatever we think at the time of death, that same body we attain without fails. So Krishna tells in Bhagavad gita as we saw in the previous class, antakala chamamaran muktva kalevaram at the time of death, who is thinking of me, he will attain body of my nature. What is the nature of Krishna's body? Krishna's body is never dying. Krishna's body is eternal. So when Krishna was there on the battlefield of Kurukshetra, he was very old. As per the calculations of time, around 125 years old. He has sons, great grandsons. You can just imagine, 125 years. But Krishna's body never grew old beyond 16 to 20 years. He was always like a young boy. It was never growing old. So this is the nature of Krishna's body. So Krishna's body is full of knowledge, full of unlimited bliss and eternity. So any person who is thinking absorbed in thoughts of Krishna at the time of death then his body would be spiritual. It would be having nature of Krishna's body. So thus King Kulashekar is telling so now my mind is completely absorbed in thinking of you. But at the time of death if I'm not able to think then what would be my situation? So let me now die immediately. He's praying. So just like the student may sometime think when the exams were getting postponed because of COVID why they are postponing it. I have done such nice revision and everything. Now if I write the examination I will score very good marks. So thus dying or such similar words could be frightening for the materialist but for the devotee, yes he is very very conscious of death but he is not scared because he is always absorbed in the service of Krishna thinking of Krishna. So that is a way to prepare for death. And we will see further from the verses of Bhagavad Gita what Krishna is recommending. So very important verses three verses we'll cover today all of you should read carefully verse number seven. So previously Lord Krishna has described anybody who thinks of Me at the time of death he gets body of my nature. Why this happens because there is a law yam Yamvapi Smaran Bhavam Tiajati ante Kalevaram whatever our object of meditation is a person goes to that object attains a body of similar nature. Now Lord Krishna is further telling because this is the principle whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he will attain without fail. Tasma surveyshu Kaleshu mahman usmar Yodha Maya Pitamano Buddhir Mahme Vaishyasi Asan Shayaha tasma surveyshu Kaleshu mamanusmar yodicha surveyshu means always Kaleshu means time, means at all time. Therefore Tasmat because this is the principle your consciousness at the time of death defines your next body maam anusmar Yodhycha therefore you should aspire not for any material body, any material body acquired here there are various planets where living conditions are very very good. But any kind of body you get that body will be fraught with four defects of that of disease, death, old age and birth. So therefore you should not think about any material personality or object. You should rather think of the spiritual personalities. So Mam anusmar yudhicha, I am the supreme person. My body is completely spiritual. Mam anusmar thinking of Me yudhycha, you keep on fighting. So thus the spiritual life is so nice. Krishna is telling Arjuna therefore Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Krishna and at the same time carry out your prescribed duty of fighting. With your activities dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed on Me you will attain Me without doubt. So we need not change our course of activities. So the perfection of spiritual life can be attained by doing whatever task we are doing now, Mam Anusmar, Yudhi Chakrishna is not telling you. Leave fighting. Leave the duties of a householder, living in palace and all these things. No, you can continue in your position. Continue fighting. But what is important is mam Anusmara, you should always think of me, my form in which I am present before you and Mai arpeta Manobadhir. While you are fighting, it is important that you train your consciousness also. Unless we have trained ourselves to think of something constantly we cannot think of it at the time of death. Thus if a person has trained his consciousness to be engaged in loving remembrance of Krishna then at the time of death it will be possible to think of Krishna, my arpita mano Buddhir. My mind and intelligence should be fixed on your mind and intelligence should be fixed on me and your activity should be dedicated to me. And then you will attain me without any doubt. Mai vaishyasi asan shayaha so very simple. Whatever activity we are doing in order to attain perfection of life we need not try to improve our living conditions or dying conditions here. If a person is there lying on the railway track he should not think or let me purchase nice suit, boot, nice shoes and nice gadgets and keep on sitting on the railway track. First of all the inquiry should be let me somehow get freed and run away from this track. There is no use of arranging comforts on the railway track where death is certain. Similarly all the endeavors should be done to avoid this process of repeated birth and death. So lot of tension we need not take whether I am losing on some part some show off is reducing some material comforts are reducing so called success is reducing no, that also follows automatically. When a person follows spiritual life his material life is automatically comfortable but still if a person thinks no, let me do the material things what is the use? Because death is certain on a railway track the first endeavor should be to run from the track somehow. So therefore the life is very simple. You need not do anything need not calculate what will make me happy nothing will make us happy happiness and distress are same thing here in the material world. So what we should do is whatever activity we feel comfortable in like Arjuna was feeling comfortable in his duty as Kshatriya he was having Kshatriya spirit orientation so you fight no problem. You can do the work of a barber very nicely. You continue your salon you are very nicely doing selling vegetables you continue being vegetable vendor you are having very menial job you are a car cleaner or housekeeping person somewhere you can continue cleaning the cars and roads but the same activity will make you successful. If the activity is dedicated to Krishna means the results of the activity are offering to Krishna and your mind and intelligence is also fixed in Krishna. That's it. So external activities do not matter. So whether I'm managing some business or I am doing some job, menial job or very high class job I am king, I am politician, I am president. We can continue at the same position. Arjuna continued his duty of warrior and politician. But Krishna is giving the formula here. In order to attain God, in order to meet me, see me face to face, attain eternal life. What you have to do is your mind and intelligence should be fixed in me. Mam anusmar one should always practice thinking of Krishna and offer the results of activities to Krishna. That's it. Abhyasayoga yukte NA chaitasananya Gamina paramam purusham devyam yati parthanuchantayan he who meditates on the supreme personality of Godhead. His mind constantly engaged in remembering me undeviated from the path he parth is sure to reach me. Chaitasa nanyagamina chaitasa means his mind, intelligence, his consciousness NA anya Gamina without any deviation, it is not going anywhere. Paramam purusham divyam yati parthanu chintayan so some people tell that Krishna is a light, is an energy and we have to go and merge in that energy. But here, please read carefully. It is being mentioned. Paramam purusham divyam yati yati means achieves. He achieves. Paramam purusham so Krishna has told you will come to me. And now Krishna is telling here you will attain the supreme person. Krishna is giving the standard understanding. So just like the manager tells you follow me. And then he tells the general principle. You have to follow your manager to become successful. Similarly, here Krishna is quoting the principle that if you do like this, you will attain the supreme person. Chaitasa naanya Gamina don't think of anybody else, anything else. That is why all our activities. Thus the Vedic culture was so beautifully defined that these principles were very nicely being followed. Every person is supposed to as soon as he gets up in the morning, everybody would immediately go to temple and people would thrice visit the temple. They would start their devil temple and then noontime and then again in the evening. So they would start with various prayers in the temple. They are Krishna conscious. And then when they are about to eat anything before eating, they will offer the food to Krishna and then eat it while taking bath. They will again remember Krishna offering food again krishna is there. Then whatever jobs they are doing, the result of their activities panchayajna they have to do every day, they will offer it to Krishna. And then you want some entertainment, you want to hear some stories. Mahabharat Ramayan were the stories, were the drama. Again. You are Krishna Conscious. You want to celebrate. You want to enjoy with your friends and relatives. Yes, celebration is there. They are all based around the pastimes of Krishna and his devotees. So always you are Krishna conscious in this way. And if a person follows this process paramam purusham divyam yati, you will attain not any. You will not merge into light. Paramam purusham divyam. You will attain a Purush, a person. What is the need of meeting a Purush? Because Purushas or people, they die here persons, they die. No, he is divyam. Divya means transcendental beyond the material dimensions. Yati means attains. A person goes and lives with the supreme person God who is beyond the material dimensions. But he will be able to do that only when ANU chintayan. Chintayan means thinking. ANU means constantly or by following in Guru shisha parampara in display succession. Sanu means following or ANU means constantly. So following the instructions of previous acharyas and constantly ANU chintayan. So without any breakage. This is the sum and substance of the entire Vedic culture that somehow or the other person should always be thinking of Krishna. Yati parthanu chintayan. So in this way if he is living or he is dying then his death or life is successful. Now here Krishna is telling again very important principle. Kavim puranam anushasitaram anuraniyan samanus maredyah Sarvas varnam tamasaf parastat. So what is the nature of Krishna? That supreme person whom we are talking about attaining here? So here he's telling Kavim puranam anushasitaram Kavim means very intelligent person who knows past, present and future. One who knows everything. Kavim puranam means the oldest. We have young people, we have old people. And the one who is oldest fathers have come from their father, grandfather, great grandfather. Like this the oldest person puranam. So this is the nature of supreme person. He is not a formless entity. He is very intelligent. Energy cannot be intelligent. He is very intelligent. He is Kavim and he is the oldest puranam Anushasitaram. Anushasan shastan means to control Shastra. Shastu means to control. So to control we either use the scriptures, scriptures control regulate the lives of people. So they are called Shastra. Those who cannot follow the Shastra, they have to be controlled by Shastra. Shastra means weapon. And Shishya, that word also has come from the Shastu means to control. Anusha Sitaram means he's the controller. So the world nothing in the world is beyond control. So under whose control this is acting. This is the search which a person should do in this human form of life. He should not be simply satisfied thinking oh my suffering is because of COVID If COVID is not there, still I was suffering still disease was there and death was there. So ultimately why am I suffering? Under whose control this suffering is being given to me? So here Krishna is telling krishna should be thought of that supreme person under whose control every happiness and suffering is happening in this material world. He is Kavim. He is most intelligent. He's Puranam. He is the oldest anusha Sitaram. He is the controller. Anur aniyansam anusmare. So in this way a person should think of God in complete knowledge. Anur aniyansam. ANU means the atom. Just see Bhagavad gita 5000 years ago where was atomic theory back then when people were shepherds in the area where scientists have given the theories. But here it is mentioned anor atom aniyan some smaller than the atom. And many wonderful things are described about atom in Bhagavatam. We will discuss some other time in future sessions. Anuraniyan Sam a person who is smaller than the atom. Now they thought oh, let us see what is the fundamental particle? We'll change the fundamental particle which is responsible for all the manifestations and we'll be happy. But now they are puzzled. Within the fundamental particle, what they call fundamental, they have found many many particles and there is no end to it. They are just finding newer and newer particles. And not that this is then within also if they go, they'll find another particle. As is the atom, so is the Universe. Just like one cell they have analyzed, they are telling this cell is like it is more complex than the New York City. One small cell is more complex than the New York City. And similar complications they would find within the atom. Unfortunately, the atom cannot be magnified and perceived like they are perceiving the cell functions. Otherwise, within the atom the same principles are there which are there in the universe. This is the unique creation of God. But like this, if they keep on entering within, deep within, finally they'll find supreme personality of God. At present like this if they keep on traveling outside, outside the universe they'll find many many universes. And beyond all them, they'll find another personality. Who is the greatest, who is the source of all the universes? Anuranyan Mahato mahian. Thus God is called anur Anya smaller than the smallest atom also smallest particle. And Mahato Mahiyan, greater than the greatest also. So the cause of all causes of the atomic manifestation, of the entire universal manifestation is God. So in this way Krishna should be thought of. So Krishna is not some impersonal energy, but he is a person. He is Kavim. He is intelligent, oldest. He's controlling everything. And he's controlling by entering even within the smallest fundamental particle. And Sarvasi dhataram achinta rupam dhataram how things are being maintained that is also so amazing how amazingly nice species have come into existence. There is one male species, one female species. Both have to exist simultaneously. If one body is not developed immediately, there is death. Population will not continue. So in all the species perfectly. How people evolutionists? They even think like this. Evolution happened perfectly. Male and female developed simultaneously from chemicals. No. So male form, female form simultaneously they are existing. Amazing. Maintenance is going on. Carbon dioxide oxygen the ecosystem everywhere. It is so nice. So who is responsible for all this maintenance? Sarvasty Dhataram. He is maintainer of everything. And again it is mentioned. Please read this word again. Achinti Rupam. Rupam means form. It is not written here. Arupam. It is written achinti Rupam achinti means. Inconceivable. If somebody is oldest and he is intelligent, he's controller, he's smaller than the smallest. He is maintainer means he's a person. A person is controlling, a person is wise, a person maintains. So person has got a form. So how is the form of God? That is achintya. That is inconceivable. That is why we cannot conceive. Mother Yashoda is seeing all the Universes within the mouth of Krishna. She's seeing herself and Krishna within the mouth of Krishna. So all the Universes are within Krishna or Krishna is within the Universe. It is very difficult to conceive and both things are happening simultaneously. Krishna is showing all Universes within his mouth and at the same time Krishna is existing in one of the Universes. Anuranyan Mahato Mahian he is smaller than the smallest, he is greater than the greatest. How the same person has become the smallest and entered the atom. And he's present outside the Universe also creating all the Universes and expanding them. This is called Achinthya Rupam inconceivable form when finite contains the infinity. So sometimes various words you'll find describing God because God is Achintya inconceivable. The same God will be addressed as Arupam. Arupam means he has got no form Arupam and he will be called Sarupam. And sometimes both names will be used. Like Gajendra. He is praying. Arupayorupaya nama ashchare Karmane. So Gajendra is praying to Supreme Personality Arupaya Urupaya. Arupaya means you don't have any form. Urupaya means you have great many forms. Namu Ashare Karmani your activities are wonderful. So what does it mean? It is contradictory. He is telling Arupaya Urupaya, you have no form and you have great many forms. That is why it is called Achintya. So in the Upanishads you'll find this understanding of Arupam and all these things to help us understand that this form of God is not like our form. God is not person like us. So God has got the absolute truth. Krishna has got personal aspect as well as impersonal aspect. So the vedas mainly describe the upanishads. Beg your pardon? Mainly describe the impersonal understanding of God. What is the impersonal feature? That is called the Brahma feature. Just like the fire. Is there a Kadesh Tita, seagner Josana Vistarianiyata so can we say the heat and light of fire is different from the fire? Or should we say the heat and light of fire is same as fire? What is the proper statement if we tell the light of fire, heat of fire is different from fire? Is it possible that fire is existing without light, dark fire or fire is existing without heat, cold fire? That is not possible. Is it possible that heat and light are existing but fire is not there? That is also not possible. But I am seeing the light of fire. I am touching the heat or light of fire. Does it mean I am touching the fire? No. So heat and light of fire are different from fire as well. As they are one with fire because they cannot exist independent of fire. So thus heat and light is another expansion extension. Another feature of fire which is all pervading which is not localized in one situation, one position. Thus that feature of God by which he is present everywhere in Bhagavad Gita Krishna mentions we will see that. So Krishna is telling I am all pervading but how I am all pervading in my impersonal feature. So just like the fire's, heat and light would be there spread everywhere in the room. But fire is there situated in one place. In a similar fashion the Vedas described. So you should not get bewildered when some descriptions we find of this impersonal aspect. The Brahma aspect which is there spread everywhere yay Sarvamidam, Tatam but there is a personal aspect also. Just like the fire. Parasibramana shakti sarvelam. Jagat. Similarly the Parabram is situated in one place. But the energy of Parabram are spread are situated everywhere. In this way the God is existing. God is existing in his personal form in one place but through his energies he is all pervading in this universe. So that is called Achinti Rupam. So God has got a form sometimes he is called Arupam because the impersonal aspect of God, his energies, the way he is also present everywhere. When we tell God is present everywhere, that is same as telling. The fire is present everywhere in the form of its heat and light which is non different from fire. Not in the personal form. In the personal form fire is present in the burner or in the woods. In a similar fashion there is a place where God is present and Krishna describes here he has described previously taddham Paramama that is my place. But in my impersonal aspect I am present everywhere throughout the creation. So that is why his form is called inconceivable Achintya. But he has got a form. So in Bhagavad gita krishna does not mention no form. He is mentioning Achinthya Rupam inconceivable form and Aditya Varnam. If you have a form, you should have a complexion also. How is your complexion? Aditya? Like son effulgent Adity varnam Thomas of parastat. He is transcendental to the material darkness. So this is a description of God. This is how you should think of Krishna. Not as a great politician, as a powerful magician but how a person should think of Krishna to make his life perfect, this knowledge should be there. If this knowledge is not there, then success. He will not attain Kavim purana Manushasitaram he should think of Krishna as Kavim. One who knows everything. Puranam, the oldest anushasitaram he is controlling everything. Anuranyansam who has entered even within the atom anus Maridya. In this way you should think of me. Saravasta dhataram achintya rupam. I am maintaining everything. My form is inconceivable and I am having complexion. I am having effulgence of Sun Tamas of Parasthar transcendental to material darkness. One should meditate upon the supreme Person as the one who knows everything. He is the oldest, who is the controller, who is smaller than the smallest who is the maintainer of everything, who is beyond all material conception, who is inconceivable and who is always a person. He is luminous like the sun. Being transcendental is beyond this material nature. So the same thing was spoken by Shukde Goswami also when Parishit Maharaj asked how I can make my life successful in seven days so he told tasmad Bharat Sarvatma bhagawan ishvaru Harihi, Shro, Tavya, Kirti, Tavyascha, Smartavyascha etchata. Bhayam, if you want Abhayam fearlessness from this death I thought I had two years for writing the exam, for preparing for the exam. But now I hear that only few days are left. So I'm very fearful I'll fail in the examination. So Shugdya Goswami is telling if you want to avoid the fear of this examination of death only seven days are left. You adopt this process and you will become fearless. Success is assured. What is the process? Shro, Tavya, Kirtitavyascha, Smartavyam, Cha etchatabhayam. To get fearlessness, you do Shrotavya. Keep on hearing Kirtitavya. You keep on chanting his names and Smartavya keep on thinking about the form, name activities of whom tasmat, Bharas, Sarvatma who is Atma of everybody. So as we have seen in Bhagavad Gita there are two Atmas within this body paramatma and ANU Atma that is we individual soul and Sarvatma or Parmatma Krishna will further described in the 13th chapter. 13 chapter? Yes. 13th chapter. Shetragya chapi mam with the sarvashetreshubharata. You should understand I am also the soul Atma present in the body. But I am conscious of all the bodies. So you should do Kirtan of the Supreme Person who is Sarvatma who is present in everyone's body along with the individual soul. Bhagavan ishvaru Hari who is called Bhagawan who is not some impersonal energy. Oh, that energy, that spark is present in the heart. No, it is told here Bhagavan bhagawan means who has got opulences. Bhag means Opulence who is most beautiful, who is most strong, who is most wise. So he's having all the opulences. Bhagawan means person. So he is person ishvaraha ishvara means He's Controller and he Hari means he takes away all the material miseries of life. So the same supreme person Krishna Shukde Goswami is telling nam sankirtanam yasya sarbapapa pranashanam so the sankirtana of his name this is the final verse of Bhagavatam conclusion nam Sankirtanam Yasya Sarvapa Pranashanam Pranamodu Shamanas so I offer my respects to that great Lord who is removing all the material miseries from the life. So this is the conclusion of Shukhde Goswami. This is the conclusion of Bhagavad Gita. So we need not be concerned very much about improving the living conditions. Actually, these are only dying conditions. So some people are very mad in improving so called dying conditions. Improving that morsel of grass, collecting more morsels of grass and forget that this death and birth is not by chance. It is under the laws of some nature. Next body also follow certain laws. So my endeavor should be no more to get these material bodies but establish myself in a position of no repeated births and deaths. And that is possible according to Bhagavad Gita by this simple process. So don't try to get deviated by any other process krishna is recommending. Very simple. Always, whatever activity you are doing, continue in your activity. But the results you please offer to me and your mind should be absorbed in thinking of me constantly. Your intelligence should also be absorbed in me. How can I serve Krishna? How can I serve Krishna? Mind intelligence absorbed in thinking of Krishna the activities offered to Krishna you can attain me without any doubt."