"So there is a very nice loca in the Brahma Samita, the literature which reveals the most confidential knowledge of spiritual life. So in this shloka it is explained. Agnir. Mahiga ganambambu. Marudisha. Kalastatma. Manasi tijagatrayani. So here Lord Brahma is explaining agnir Mahi Gaganam ambu marutisha. Agni means fire, earth, water. Gagan means ether. So these gross energies and kalas tata manasi jagatrayani marut means air. Kalaha means time. Tata Atma. Atma means soul. Jagatrayani yasmad Bhavanti vibhavanti Vishanti Three words are used. Bhavanti means bhava means creation. Vibhavanti means the reverse. Annihilation, destruction. Yasmad Bhavanti vibhavanti Vishanti yamcha. So the source of creation and destruction, maintenance, it all lies in that supreme personality. And his name is govinda Madhy purusham adipurush purush means a person. The origin, the beginning of everything is a person. And that person, his name is Govinda Tamaham Bhajami. I worship that supreme person. So just like the other elements can be controlled, agni can be controlled. Now people are the terrorists are very expert. They are also using scientific devices to produce explosions. But there are some suits by which that explosion, the fire of that explosion can be avoided. Explosion proof suits, fireproof suits are there. So there is a technology, a science or there is fire. Then you have fire extinguishers. So there is a technology by which you can avoid the effect of fire. The sun's fire is there. We can have air conditioners. And thus the influence of fire can be avoided. So these are various technologies to avoid the influence of fire, to avoid the influence of water. Similarly there are other technologies. So these are various energies which compose of this creation. And one very important energy which is pointed out here in this shloka is Kalaha tatama manasiti Jagatrayani Kalaha. Kala means time is also considered an energy. So this was unknown to the modern science for a very, very long time. Was simply considered something like imaginary number. Something which is required for calculation. If you tell I went from Mumbai to Delhi and covered 200 or 2000 km, whatever the distance may be. So you covered 1000 km. That is not sufficient to say in how much time you did. There is one factor which is required in order to understand the motion. And that factor was defined as time. A variable which is required to calculate motion. This was the understanding of Newtonian physics. But then Albert Einstein understood no time is a real energy. And when an object is traveling at a fast speed, then time shrinks for that object. And this was also practically experienced. So there are many, many practical methods, demonstrations and we also have understood in theory of relativity the twin paradox and all other such sciences. So if a person is traveling at great speed, the time shrinks for that person. So thus time is a real energy. So just like the time of the impact of time is reduced, if a person is traveling at great speed. So just like we have been able to reduce or nullify the effect of other energies, we have been able to nullify the effect of water, we have been able to nullify the effect of fire, we have been able to nullify the effect of wind and so many other factors. So is it possible if we can nullify the effect of time? Oh, that would be very nice thing. Time is also an energy. So this itself is very astounding proposal and discovery which the scientists in 19th century were able to find out but 5000 years ago and not 5000. This is very very old scripture. Of course, even if you considered by the literary history, by when we found out the literature, when it was written 5000 years ago, how such wonderful things are written, that time is an energy. And last month in the Bhagavatam we were hearing how this time is actually the gross form of atom the Bhagavatam describes. So Bhagavatam describes that this entire world is made up of fundamental particle which are called atoms, which cannot be divided further. So some of the scientists by reading the Vedas also tried to find out the fundamental particle and they discovered something and started calling it ANU or atom. But there is a different thing which is mentioned in the Bhagavatam. So the smallest particle which is called ANU or atom, it is not destroyed even after the annihilation of the entire universe. This atom combines together to make different bodies. And this atom is the subtle form of time, eternal time. So this thing is very difficult to comprehend that this atom, the smallest indivisible particle, this very small unit, it is the subtle form of time. Just like the sound is subtle form of ether, the sound transforms itself into ether, into Gagan. Similarly the atom is the subtle form of time. So all such wonderful sciences explanations are given in the Bhagavatam. And now we have realized time is actually a real energy. So just like on this planet, only if you go to some places, if you are living on land, in between the land, the influence of water would be less. You won't be affected by so much of floods and other things. If you live in a place which is colder in nature, you would not much be affected by the influence of sunlight. And likewise there are proper places where influence of material energy can be avoided. Harshness of material energy. Similarly, we should not think that spiritualist means talking of something very very old. And now we are into technology. We are going off talking to Mars, Moon and some other planets. So as far as traveling to other planets is concerned, it is not something new discovery. Travel to other planets has been done millions of times by the living entities of Vedic times. And the description is then in Mahabharat. The description is there in Hariwansha, in Bhagavatam, in various other puranas. How they were all traveling to various places and even beyond the universe of the living entities would travel and how this twin paradox the time dilation happens this time dilation is also mentioned. The king was there fighting in the heavenly planets and he spent some time there and here many generations had passed away in that time. And like this many, many other things of relative influence of time have been discussed in the vedas. And we have seen lord Krishna also mentions in the Bhagavad Gita that a living entity has choice now in this human form of life to which planet he wants to go. Yanti Devavrata devan pitaranyanti. Pitravatah. Bhutaniyanti bhutajya madhyajino pi yanti mam devan deviyajo yanti a person can go to the higher planets which are controlled by more empowered living entities. So there is no question of wondering whether life is there on some planet or it is not there. We have to understand sarvatragamachantyamcha about the soul. It is mentioned soul is all pervading. The life is there on all the planets but we may not be able to appreciate it for limitations of our science. But just like if you find a car on the street can you say any part of the car, it is unimportant, it is vestigial? No, every part which is there in the automobile the engineer has put there or the scientist has put there for some reason nothing is by chance in an automobile in a similar fashion in this universe a very big automobile, a very big body which is also rotating, which has got many many planets, nothing is by chance. Similarly within this body also which is a sample universe nothing is by chance. Every organ is of some use we of course do not understand. So on recent trip one of our devotees was explaining that how our aging happens there are shoelace kind of structure in the DNA and the ends of that it gets regularly withered off and our aging is directly proportionate to the withering of that end of the shoelace kind of structure in the DNA. And that was so long understood as vestigial means it is of no importance, no importance by chance it is there. So then they analyze various things and now they are coming to understand that all the things that we recommend so this keeps a person young and very healthy. So if a person has irregular sleeping patterns then those things will get withered off very soon and if a person has got wrong eating habits he eats lot of non vegetarian food, he has intoxication and non regulated illicit sex then also it gets withered off very soon. So if you follow these regulative principles they not only help to advance you in spiritual life if you do fasting so all these things keep those DNA structures intact. So just like the science has discovered now various things that what we were earlier considering vestigial or of no use the pituitary gland was considered vestigial. It is of no use. But now we understand it is the master gland of the body and many many other glands are dependent on it for their functions. In a similar fashion with the advancement of science we will understand nothing is vestigial or no planet is without life in this universe. That is what the Vedas described. Vasudhadi vibhuti binam vibhuti means opulences binam. There are different opulences on different planets. Every planet has got a unique living conditions and there are bodies which can survive in those conditions. But all these theories, speculations come into picture when we think universe has come into existence by chance. No, if we think car has come by chance then we can think by chance. There is some part which is of no use. But just like a person who is little sensible can understand a car cannot come by chance. So human bodies and the system, the environment in which human bodies are sustaining it also cannot come by chance. So the creator has put everything in place with proper use, proper utility. And every planet which is floating in there, it has not come by chance. But there is life present. Every planet has got life. But Krishna mentions in bhagavad gita brahma bhuna lokan punar avartin Arjuna. Now so much research is there and people are passionate yes, we will go and live on Mars. But now we are not able to even solve this small virus problem on this planet about which we have so many books written and so much of science and knowledge we know of this planet where the conditions are very very favorable. We cannot move out of our house and somebody is telling we'll be able to move out of the planet and go to another planet about which we have hardly any idea. Here we have all the best institutions, all the best brains, best technology, best support, best environment and we are not able to find solution of a small invisible entity. And we promise that we'll go to other planet and we will arrange everything over there. Here there is so much of water and food, farms and fields but still people are not having sufficient food and water. Even the most developed countries, they become waterless every year sometime. And we are telling where there is no water we will create produce water. So this thing is simply blindness. When a person is very passionate he becomes blind and he does not understand reality. So he develops little technology and he thinks oh, with this technology I will go and live there. So it is foolishness. Just like here, if somehow you are able to locate a Rashtrapathi Bhavan oh, the best house in the country is Rashapati Bhavan. I have seen it by the and so we will go and live in that Rashtrapathi Bhavan. No, you cannot live that live there. You have to be very, very qualified. The most qualified person of the country. And then you will be allowed to live in Rashtrapathi Bhavan for a limited time. In a similar fashion, the Vedas mentioned Karanam Guna Sangu asya Sadh Asad Yoni Janmasu yes, definitely you can be promoted to other planets. You can go to other planets. But there is a process not in this body. So if you develop proper qualities nowadays rogues and thieves also by attending some coaching institutes and scoring some marks, they also occupy good positions or by some power and some techniques they become ministers. But unless somebody is qualified, you cannot cheat Krishna's arrangement. So higher planets are meant for those with higher qualities. With good qualities, Godly qualities. And lower planets are those which are meant for people with nefarious qualities. Ombur bhuaswah tatsavitur varenium. We chant the mantra. So our planetary system, the Vedas describe there are 14 planetary systems. And our planetary system is the 7th level planetary system. So this is called BHU loka. Above. This is bhuar Loka, then Swarloka, then Mahaloka, then Janaloka, then Tapaloka, then Satyaloka. So there are living entities just like on this planet. We have got the technology now by which you can control water, you can control fire, air. On the higher planet, when you go, the living entities are more and more freed from the influence of these energies. And on every subsequent level, the happiness is ten times more than the previous level. So you go to next level Bovarloka. Then happiness is experienced ten times more than earthly experience. Over that you go 100 times more than earthly experience. And these planetary systems are meant for people who are fond of material enjoyment. And over that, the topmost four planetary systems maharloka, Janaloka, Tapaloka, Satya, Loka they are meant for people who want to follow spiritual life without any disturbance. So at the end of Brahma's day, that is called Kalpa. So Brahma's day is a huge day. That is equal to 1000 Yugas. On our planet there is destruction. And the ten planetary systems, they go down deep in the waters, annihilation happen. But these four planetary systems maharloka, Janaloka, Tapaloka, Satya, Loka satyaloka is also called Brahmaloka where Lord Brahma, the creator of universe is living secondary creator. So these planets are not disturbed. People are following spiritual life. They are not disturbed by annihilation. They completely engage in spiritual activities. So who goes into these planets, you cannot cheat. Not by writing some examination artificially. You can go there. Karanam guna sango asya you have to associate with Guna proper qualities. If the more you associate with Satvic quality, the higher you will be promoted to these planetary systems. So those who follow Brahmacharya, they go to Maharloka, Nashtik, Brahmacharya, they go higher janaloka, then you follow Van Prastha, then you go higher, that is Tapo Loka. And then if you follow Sanyas, then you go to the highest Loka, that is Satya Loka. So these are meant for Renunciants who understand that wherever I go? Even if suppose, let's say first of all it is not possible. You cannot cheat the laws of nature. Just like artificially, you cannot enter into a government house or office. You have to qualify. And then you can go there in a similar fashion. Simply if you know how to take a rocket to some other place, you cannot enter and live there. Maybe you can reach, but you will die there. The laws will not allow you to stay there for a long time. If you have to stay there for a long time, you have to qualify yourself with proper qualities. So even if suppose a person goes and lives there, for argument's sake, if a person is not able to understand, he is very superly atheistic and he lacks common sense also. So still, if it no, no, we'll go to Mars. Even if you are able to go to Mars or Moon or some other planet, will the problems of life be solved? Death will not happen, disease will not happen, old age will not happen. The depression will not happen, competition will not be there, breakups will not be there. All these things will exist always and everywhere. So the depression is bound to happen. And that is happening now also. The developed nations who have met all the parameters of success, the people are depressed over there. So that is why we should have this common sense. On which planet should I go where I can become happy? So the spiritualists are also engaged in a rigorous practice. Just like the materialist. The topmost science in the material domain that is aiming now to transfer ourselves to another planet in a similar fashion, the topmost science, the spiritual science also aims. It just tells you are meant to promote yourself to different planet. Because in this planet, under the influence of energies, you will remain always under stress. Why? Because everything is controlled here by the influence of time. Time will make you old and old age is a great stress. Time will make you die and death is a great stress. Time will create diseases for you. And diseases are a great stress. Time will make you hungry. Time will make you feel sleepy. Time will make you get up again. Time will make you meet with some people. Time will separate you from those people. Time will separate you from your belongings, from name, fame and so many other things. Thus, this influence of time is very, very harsh. So that is why a living entity wonders where is that planet? I can go to some place where influence of fire is not there, water is not there, wind is not there. Where is the place where influence of time is not there? And that is explained. Yes, there is a place where influence of time does not exist. So Lord Krishna, that is why it tells do not fall for this other smaller yogic practices which promise you to transfer yourself to another planet so not by some mundane qualification if you want to go to other specific planet then there are yoga practices recommended. There are six chakras in the body with adhishanam chakra, manipurak chakra and vishuddhi chakra, like that. So the air so it is explained in the technology of the body, how the soul, the spark which gives life to our body, it is floating in various airs. And that life force, that air has to be raised. On which the soul is floating through different chakras and then has to be brought to the top of the head and from here, Brahmarandra rupture on the top of the head. If the Yogic practices are perfect, then the Yogi can transfer himself at the time of death. For that also he has to wait for the right movement. Just like you have to travel in a train. Or if you are traveling on a street also if there is red signal if you cross, accident will happen. You will not be able to cross the road at all. Or if there is no train, you cannot move to another destination. Similarly we'll understand further in this chapter how there is a proper time for the passage to higher planets. So the yogi waits. He controls his breathing cycles because our breathing cycles are fixed before death. So the Yogi finishes his breathing cycles at the right time when he sees the doors are open and the thoroughfare the pathway to other planets where he wishes to go, it is clear and then he leaves the body and travels to that place. So thus all these things is wonderful sciences which are mentioned in the vedas and we can understand in Bhagavatam how Shugdev Goswami is predicting the future also. So guidance should be taken from such a personality who can see past, present as well as future shukde Goswami is describing these dynasties are going to come, these many kings will be there in the dynasty. These are going to be their names, these are going to be their activities for these many years they are going to rule how clear vision. It is mentioned over there so that there are powerful sages who are beyond the influence of time and those powerful sages need not go to any other planet and wherever they go, the time cannot influence them. So it is mentioned in Bhagavatam time can know in the third canto I think chapter number eleven or something I'll share maybe sometime so it is mentioned time can only influence the living entities who think that they are the body, who are identifying themselves with the body. Those living entities who are able to come to a spiritual platform where they completely disidentify themselves with the body. They are not in the illusion that they are the body. Time cannot exert any influence upon them. But for ordinary people yes, going to that planet is very much recommended where there is no influence of time. And that is called vekuntaloka. That is called the spiritual world. Nimeshardha KYOVA vrajati nahiyatrapi Samayah. The time does not move at all. Time does not influence the living entity. So it is very much possible. It is scientific. So just like the time reduces its influence, the aging reduces of a person traveling at great speed, it is discovered you go to different planets, time will have different influence. Similarly there is a place if you go, time has got no influence at all. It is also one energy. And the spiritualist is aiming to go back home, back to Godhead. That is the original place of the spirit soul where time does not give harassment to living entity by this influence. So what is that process? So briefly Lord Krishna is describing here. So let us try to quickly go through these shlokas. Some other thing is coming. Yes. So this is text number ten. So please listen carefully. Prayanakalay Manasachale Bhaktiya Yukto Yoga Balena Chaiva bravo Ramadhranam Aveshasamyak Satam Param Parusham Upayati Divyam one who at the time of death fixes his life between the eyebrows and in full devotion engages himself in remembering the supreme Lord will certainly attain to the supreme personality of Godhead. So Krishna is mentioning Prayan Kale. So this is called the time of test. This human life is a preparation for this test. And test is Prayan Kale. Prayan means when the time is there for you to move on from this body, from this place, that is called death. Manasa Achalena without being deviated bhaktiya yukto. Now very clearly Lord Krishna is mentioning how Bhakti is very important. Without Bhakti, you cannot make your spiritual life perfect. So anybody who's telling you can follow any other process. He has not read even Bhagavad gita. We have seen sufficient examples. Bhaktiya yukto. Yoga balena. Chaiva another important word is yoga balena. By the strength of yoga. So somebody can tell. Okay. At the time of death, I have to think of the desired personality. I have to think of Krishna and then I can go to him his planet. It is not possible unless a person has practiced remembering Krishna throughout his life. So that is called yoga balena. A person has to develop yogic strength by practicing it throughout the life. The life air should be fixed between the bravo, between the eyebrows. Pranam pranam means that special air which is carrying the soul satam purusham upaiti devyam. So such a person can attain Purusham. Param param purusham means the supreme person. We are all persons. The original personality from whom all of us have come. He is called Parampurish, the supreme person. So here Krishna is not telling the process of reaching any other planet. Because Krishna mentions Abrama Bhuvana Lokan Punar Avarthi Narjana wherever you go and travel within this universe either to the higher planets or to atal Vital, Suttal, Talatal, Rasatal, Mahatal Patal the seven planets which fall below the earthly planets wherever you go, the influence of time will always give you harassment. So that is why the Supreme Planet, where I live, just like in a kingdom, if you go to the place where king lives, the capital, that is the most developed city and all the best comforts you'll find in the capital where the king lives in a similar fashion it is common sense where the creator lives, where God lives, that place is most desirable place to go and thus there is no problem in that place. So Krishna is describing the process here. So at the time of death, if your mind is not disturbed so we get disturbed by small things here. And that time of death is very excruciatingly painful for the living entity physically and mentally. Also he's going to get separated from the place, from the money, from the position he loves so much. So he's very much disturbed and then physical maladies anyway are there. So it is very disturbing situation for a soul, the time of death. So if you don't practice undisturbed state of existence while living here before death, it is impossible to have achalayana manasa undisturbed mind at the time of death. So when the mind is undisturbed and bhaktiya yukto and in full devotion person is able to remember Krishna, then he goes to Krishna that supreme planet yadaksharam veda vidovadanti vishantiyo Vitaraga yato brahmacharyam charanti tatte padam sangrahena pravakshi. Persons learned in the vedas who utter omkara and who are great sages in the renounced order enter into brahma. Desiring such perfection, one practices celibacy. I shall now explain to you this process by which 1 may attain salvation. Now here Krishna is describing two processes. There are two kinds of spiritualists one who simply want to move out of this place, out of this material atmosphere where time has got influence. So they end up just being a particle in the spiritual sky. And there is another spiritualist who goes into spiritual planets and manifests a spiritual form and engages in the service of loving service of God. So here Lord Krishna is describing the situation, the process being followed by people who want to merge as a small particle in the spiritual effulgence person learned in the vedas, who utter omkara and who are great sages in the renounced order enter into brahma. So that light is called brahma which is coming out the energy which is coming out of the supreme person. Desiring such perfection, one practices celibacy brahmacharyam charanti. So this celibacy thus here again Krishna stresses it is very, very important. So many people ask where is celibacy required for spiritual life? So bodily things are different, necessities are different. Spiritual necessities are different. For spiritual necessity, I am chanting for physical necessity, I am enjoying illicit sex, but no yad achanto brahmacharyam charanti brahmacharya is very, very important. So without brahmacharya there is no question of spiritual advancement. So in Kalyuga, especially when it is very difficult, all of us are trained to break Brahmacharya principles from the very early age. There is no other hope for us but Hare Krishna Mahamantra. So by practicing Hare Krishna Mahamantra a person is able to automatically come to the platform of following Brahmacharya. But in other processes, first you become strong Brahmachary and then there is question of further execution of Yoga. Yad Ichanto brahmacharyam Charanti this is the desire for Brahmacharya going and transferring yourself to the spiritual sky. Tatte Padam Sangrahena Pravashe in a summary form summarized form I will explain to you this process. So in a very very short summary, Krishna explains in two shlokas the process by which the Yogis transfers themselves not to any planet of this universe but to the material sky. And Krishna explains here sarvadwarani Saiyamya Manoridhinirudhyacha Murdni Adhyatman Afranam Mastito Yogadharanham the Yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements. Closing all the doors of senses and fixing the mind on the heart and the life air at the top of the head one establishes himself in Yoga sarvadwaraniya Manoridi, Nirodhyacha so it is very important. Sarvadwarani saiyamya dwar means gates. There are various gates of the body. Mouth is one gate, eyes are another gate. Ears nose are another gate. So controlling all the doors of the body, what does it mean? It means stopping the external activities of the senses. So now we are very fond of seeing external forms and we get captivated. This is called pratyahar. Prabhupada explains pratyahar means reversing the activities of the senses. Now the senses are engaged in the external world. Senses have to be engaged in the internal world. Rather than seeing the forms external outside one has to practice seeing the form of Krishna within the heart. As we have seen previously how Krishna describes Manu Riddhi Niradhya the mind has to be fixed in the heart. Why? Because Saravasan Krishna is living in the heart. So on Krishna the meditation has to happen. So the life here should be fixed. Mana Pranam the Pranavayu should be here on the top of the head. And the mind should be fixed on the form of Krishna within the heart. And pratyahara should be done. All the doors should be controlled. So we are very fond of hearing the voices wonderful music outside. Now the Yogi should focus on the omkara sound which is being produced within his mind. So this practice has to be done. The form has to be observed within in the heart. So this is also done by the devotees. This process in the Satyuga. But those devotees don't exactly. There is little difference. The impersonalists who have no desire to serve God and who simply want to merge as a particle in God's light they imagine the form of God within the heart. But the devotees, they are observing the form they are practically seeing God within their heart. But whatever it is, the mind has to be fixed in the form of God. That is a. Process of yoga. So when your activities of the senses are regulated when external activities are not disturbing you then only it is possible to focus within so that is why sense regulation is recommended. Brahmacharya is recommended the activity which pulls a person to this external world so then a person is always thinking of Krishna within his heart and he's hearing that Omkara sound which is being vibrated within and the life is fixed on the top and in this way a person establishes himself in yoga and then what happens? Omiti kaksharam brahma vyaharan mam anusmaran YAF prayati Tejan Deham sayyati paramam gaTim after being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred syllable Om the supreme combination of letters if one thinks of the supreme personality of Godhead and quits his body he will certainly reach the spiritual planets. So once this perfection is achieved, what we discussed in the previous Shloka, then if a person is vibrating the sacred syllable Om, the supreme combination of letters and at the same time along with chanting Om so people tell you chant Om although we are not qualified to chant Om, most of us in this age we have to be very advanced to chant Om so after you get proper initiation, second initiation, when you get the sacred thread from the Spiritual Master, then you become qualified to chant Om So otherwise it will be of no use. And even if you are chanting, why you are not recommending the regulation? Krishna clearly is mentioning here mam Anusmaran, you have to think of me. Even if you chant Om, you have to think of Krishna. So Om has to be chanted and it has to be chanted within the mind. And then Mam Anusmaran, a person has to think of Krishna. And then Ya prayatijan Deham tiyajan Deham a person leaves this body in such a situation, sayati Paramam gaTim he will certainly reach the spiritual planets. But this is very tough process. But the same process is applied for transferring to any other planet. Also, instead of remembering about Krishna he can think of the situation in those planets or the deity of the other planets. How we can think of other planets? The process is same just like now how do we go to America? First of all we hear about America and then we develop desire to go and then we qualify. We book an airplane, we reach at the right time to catch a flight and then we sit and we go. In this way, there are subtle energies which carries us to different planets. And the Yogi has to wait for the right time, understand the right time from the scriptures and in this way meditating upon the descriptions of the planets which are given in the Vedas. To whichever planet you want to go, you can go. But an intelligent person understands even if I go there, I have to die. Birth, death, old age, disease, miseries will always be there on every planet. So that is why intelligent person follows this process he does not think of other planets, other demigods he thinks of Krishna and goes to spiritual planets. But this is very very tough process. So controlling following this Brahmacharya and for raising this life air through various chakras and meditating on Krishna within the heart and controlling your breathing cycle and just waiting for the right moment for the soul to leave the body this very very tough process. Ashtang Yoga process which was to be followed in Krithiyoga Satyoga so for people in general Krishna tells so this is very difficult process. Now Krishna is telling easier way to do it and what is that way? Ananya Cheta Satam yomam smarati nityashah tasyaham sula bhavta yoginaha. So Krishna now mentions Ananya Cheta Satam ananya means without any deviation. Satam means always yo Mam smarathi nityashah mam means me Krishna mam smarathi SMARTi means remembers Nityashah. Nityasha means regularly tasyaham Sulabha partha tasi aham to him I Sulabha I am very very easy to attain. So Lord Brahma is describing veda BHA maduralabha mahatma bhakta veda from the Vedas Krishna cannot be found. It is very very difficult to transfer yourself to Krishna Loka. But Krishna is telling Sulab Sulab means which is very very easy to attain. I am very very easy to attain for a person whom Yukta Seoginaha who is always engaged in devotional service who is always thinking of me within the heart without any deviation for one who remembers me without deviation I am easy to obtain a son of Pritha because of his constant engagement in devotional service. So that is why it is told in the Vedas smartavyam satam Vishnu vismartavyuna jatuchit survey vidhi Nishay dasiyo revakinkara don't get confused by so many unlimited duties, rules, regulations, rituals of the scriptures and people get worried. How can I follow so many things impossible to follow. Understand what is the ultimate purpose of all the rules and regulations and that is mentioned smartavyam satam Vishnu Vismartavyona Jatuchit smartavyam always remember same words which are used here satam means always without any break vishnu always remember Krishna Vishnu never forget krishna Vismartavyuna Jatuchit never forget. Always remember him. Survey vidhi Nishe Dasyu all the do's and don'ts of the scripture eva Kinkara Kinkar means servant. They are the servant of this principle. Always remember Krishna and never forget Krishna so thus this Yogic sciences are the greatest science. Not just materialist is going to go to another planet the spiritualist also is aiming to go to another planet. Spiritual life is nothing but it is meant to transfer us to another planet but not any other planet of this world. Whether you go from this city to another city, this planet to another planet the depression, the stress, anxiety, death, old age, disease everything will remain as it is if not increases on other planets because of harsh conditions. So the Yogi goes to a planet where there is no influence harassment by different material energies including that of time. And that is the supreme planet of Krishna. So that is possible for a devotee who is always able to think of Krishna without any deviation. So is it very easy thing we can think of Krishna easily? Let me now sit Prabhu very nicely I am convinced. So I will just sit and think of Krishna constantly. So is it possible? No, it will not be possible. So there is a proper practical methodology. And Srila Prabhupada gives many many points in Bhaktira Samrita Sindhu very beautifully. Prabhupada has explained and in other books also. So what are those points? Practical steps which we can implement in our day to day life in our same household. By our individual effort we can make our life successful by following very simple practical guidelines. And what are those guidelines by which we can implement this easy process mentioned in the 14th verse. This we will see in the next class. So please do not miss the next class. We are going to discuss practical guidelines which we can follow in our home to transfer ourselves to the supreme planet with."