"So we have understood so far in this chapter the title is Attaining the supreme. So different people have different understanding of the supreme. And the unfortunate prevalent understanding is that supreme is simply an energy. As one devotee was describing today he is trying to help a person advanced in spiritual life. So this person is already following some other process. He does meditation every day for one or 2 hours. And what is his meditation? His meditation is simply sit down and Prabhu was trying to explain you please chant on saying no, no, we don't count. We should not put a number to chanting. So I sit down, I chant verbally or in mind and then ultimate aim of this chanting is to see some light. If you are able to see the light, then your meditation is successful. So like this various understandings people have but we have to understand spiritual life is very simple understanding what is truth atato Brahma Jiggyasa and the spirit is the basis of everything that we see around us. Spirit is actually the truth. Whatever we see matter, that is also spirit which is covered by ignorance. Ultimately everything is spirit. So that is why the process of finding truth, the path of truth is called spirituality. Because spirit is actually truth and matter is only category. It is another manifestation of spirit. So truth cannot have many many definitions either. Mango can be sweet, it can be sour, it can be bitter, it can be pungent, it cannot have all the tastes. There is a standard taste of mango in a similar fashion there is a standard understanding of truth. So we cannot tell oh, you don't have soul, that is also truth. You have soul, that is also truth. God is having many forms that is also truth. God has got no there should be a specific understanding. Truth does not change as per the understanding of people. So what is that understanding? That standard understanding which is attested by all the self realized souls and it is explained by God it is mentioned in the vedas it is mentioned in this chapter of Bhagavad Gita so we saw in the last verse of the previous class what is that truth? So Lord Krishna explains purushasa paraparta bhakta la BHYAS to ananyaya purushasa paraparta that truth is Purusha. Purusha means a person a man. Now we should not try to take some other meaning out of it. No, Puru means something and Shah means something and then there is no meaning of reading the vedas if you take out your own meaning. So the most famous Bhagavad gita of our country in Hindi language of course English there is no match for Prabhupada's Bhagavad gita. So it is very very misleading right from the first loca first loca if somebody opens the definition would be Kurukshetra means this body and the horses means the senses and XYZ so many other things are mentioned pandavas are the senses and the vices are the Kauravas and it's internal fight. There is nothing called Kurukshetra place. Kurukshetra is this body. So this is sir, your understanding. Why you are giving your understanding? Vedas are evidence. If everyone takes out his own meaning, there is no meaning. We have understood sufficiently. There is no meaning of Vedas. So we should not try to take out the interpretation, but try to understand from the speaker himself. So that is why the principle of the Vedas is you take the mukhivriti, the direct understanding or the dictionary understanding. Especially when the Bhagavad Gita is meant for the less intelligent people. Bhagavad Gita is a part of Mahabharata three shudra dujabandhunam tri nashruti gocharam. So it is mentioned in the Vedas. Those people who are less intelligent, they cannot understand the Vedic injunctions. For them this Mahabharat is written. So Mahabharata so much of war, politics, diplomacy, envy, fight and all these things, drama is mentioned. Why? Because people are interested in drama. So Vedvyas wanted to present this drama. So that people will be able to understand that extract this Bhagavad Gita. So ultimately this Bhagavad Gita is what Vedvyas wanted to impart. But nobody is having interest in understanding truth or philosophy. Just like the dog is not interested. Generations of dog have passed away and they have been suffering from the same problems. They don't have a house for themselves. They just occupy some street and somebody will come and throw stones. Stones were pelted upon the great grandfather of the dog. The grandfather of the dog, the dog and son of dog will face the same fate. So dog is not thinking, all these humans are making their houses, can I not make a house? So what is this institute next to where I'm living? What do people study here? Oh, they study this nice engineering. I can also study that science. No, dog will not think, why am I suffering, how to solve the suffering? But in this human form of life, solution can be made for the sufferings. So if a person does not make this inquiry, what is truth of life? And he accepts, oh, everyone is suffering. I am also having diseases, I am also having death. Dying is natural. This is just like dog things. My great grandfather was pelted upon my grandfather was thrown stores upon. My father also had the same destiny. I will also meet the same destiny. What is difference then that is called dog mentality. Human life means now I should understand what is truth. Why am I suffering? How to make the solution? So that is why truth cannot have hundred understandings. So especially Vedvyas, when he understood people are less intelligent, they will not try to understand truth. He gave this Bhagavad gita properly sandwiched by Mahabharat. Yes. You are very fond of reading drama, reading politics. So you read all these things and then in between the most important essence is Bhagavad Gita. That is what he was willing to impart. So this Mahabharata was meant for less intelligent people who were having no inclination for spiritual life and were not able to understand. So especially when a literature is written for the people who are less intelligent you should not take any other meaning. And even of the main literatures also the direct meaning Mukhariti should be taken but especially when it is meant for less intelligent people please don't apply extra intelligence and try to take out different weird interpretations. Take the dictionary meaning. If you open dictionary anywhere dictionary mentions kurukshetra means body and Pandava means senses. Why you are telling like this? Pandava means Pandu is a person and his sons are called Pandav. Kuru is a king, his sons are called Kaurav. Kurukshetra is a place. We know that geographically the location if you open dictionary find Kurukshetra they will mention there's a place Dharmakshetra and there's the location. So the dictionary meaning should be taken direct meaning. This is the principle in studying the vedas and it is common sense also I have to crack the cat examination. So the brochure mentions if you have to take admission into IIMs then you have to take cat. So if somebody interprets or taking cat means I have to take cat animal and stand outside the gate of IMS then they will give me admission then that is foolishness. Taking cat means understand from the person who has written the brochure taking cat means you have to write that cat examination you don't have to take the animal cat. So in this way people are getting misled. So that is why we should read this standard understanding. Bhagavad Gita is accepted as a book of authority but the fallacy is that people take out their own interpretations if you take the direct meaning. Krishna has mentioned purushaha. Purusha means person Saparah partha. So the supreme truth is a person but he's transcendental person, not a person like us who is conditioned by laws of nature who has a body upon himself. His body spirit is one. There is no inside and outside different for Krishna no difference between body and soul in God exists. So this is the understanding of Krishna. Krishna is always present. He does not take birth, he does not take die. He is Purusham Shashvatam, Divyam same thing arjuna will repeat again as we will see in the coming verses. So time and again it has been mentioned in the vedas in the Bhagavad Gita Purusha Purusha but Purusha Shashvatam god is eternal Purusha. That is why we call avir bhav tirobhav. He appears and he disappears he does not take birth and he does not die he appears and he disappears he may appear as a small boy, he may appear as a very big fully grown person but he appears and he disappears. So this is the first understanding which Krishna clarified enough in Bhagavad Gita and in the previous verse also we have seen it purushaha God is a person. So this has created a great calamity in life of people. That God is an energy who is interested in energy. After all we are interested in living with people. We want to have relation with people who are smart, who are beautiful, handsome, who are rich, who are powerful. And if you understand God is a person then naturally you would like to have a relationship. We are very fond of talking to somehow meeting striking relationship with famous personalities. And if you know God is a person then who would not like to speak with God? Understanding God is much more eager to talk to us. So when God is eager to talk to us and God is a person then it should not be very difficult to talk to God. And who would not like to talk to God if God is a person? But these unscrupulous interpretations have created calamity in the spiritual life of people. So when people are very much in stress they want to see some light and get relieved from the stress of this daily greedy activities. But here Bhagavad Gita offers a great hope. God is a person and how to attain God? How to meet God, how to speak to him, deal with him that Krishna mentions in the second line of previous verse bhaktiya la vyas to Ananya he can be attained only by ananya bhakti ananya means having no other desire. God, I am engaged in your service so that my COVID can be solved. My disease can be solved, my job problem can be solved. So that will not help us attain favor of God. God will give us all these things and he will tell us okay, now please don't disturb. But God does not give Bhakti very easily. Because when a person gets Bhakti then Krishna comes under control of such devotee. So God will not offer his control so easily. So all other demands God will sanction easily but he will not give his bhakti very easily. Mukti liberation also he can give very easily but not Bhakti. So Bhakta ladyas to ananyaya only by ananya bhakti no other process. So any person who has read even the basics of Bhagavad Gita very quickly he will reject all the so called other processes of spiritual or material perfection. Because in Bhagavad gita it is told bhaktiya Bhaktiya Mama Bijanati Bhaktiya La Vyastu Ananyaya Yogi Namapi Sarvesham Madhgatanantara Shraddhawan Bhajate Yomam everywhere Bhakti is Glorified it is told only a devotee can understand me in truth. So anybody who is literate who is having some knowledge of Bhagavad gita he will not accept any other artificial interpreted method of self realization. But bhakti yoga. So Lord Krishna clarified this first important point that God is a person. He implied another very very important point. That do not aspire to go to any place in this material world. Now we have just knowledge of this planet earthly planet where we are living. We do not have knowledge of other planets. But it is mentioned in the Vedas. Those people who perform pious activities, urduga, chanti, satvastha, they go to higher planets. So higher planets should have a higher standard of living. And of course, now the Pentagon also has accepted that all those UFOs, many people were telling it is conspiracy theory, it is a hoax, but they have admitted that this is fact. So the American pilots, they have noticed many, many UFOs over many years. But those were classified documents. But seeing no threat to their nation, they have declassified it and they are telling, yes, those were actually UFOs. They have a unique shape, they fly in a very unique way. Such technology does not exist on our planet. So this proves also existence of life on other planets. And of course, if you read Vedas, the descriptions are unlimited. So there are various planets and we have information of this planet where people are very weak and miserable. However, there are very, very high standards of living. Even rakshas are also more advanced. So thus the description is given in the prologue of Ramayan. When Ramana was having a fight, he was traveling all across the planet trying to find a match for him who can defeat him. So Ramana went and he defeated Kuvera. He stole his very nice chariot. And this technology was so nice. Now we are just trying to put some chips so that without anything simply from the bane, instruction can be taken and computers can work accordingly. But Ramana's chariot was doing this thing, kuveya's chariot, it would fly simply by taking the instructions of the mind. And if any part of that flying chariot or flying machine gets destroyed, then it repairs itself automatically, like our bodies repair itself. So it can also repair itself automatically. No need of worrying about maintenance. And thus Ramana was flying everywhere in that beautiful chariot. And then Ramana came across this earthly planet. Although he was not interested because the earthly human beings are very, very weak. Nevertheless he wanted to just fight for the sake of fun. And he challenged the ruler of that time. He was Anaranya, the predecessor of Dashrath Maharaj. And he came and he started fighting. And then he saw these people are very weird, ramana and Ramana's army. So even though his army was huge and having lacks of soldiers, they would throw all the weapons. But then these people had amazing powers which no human being could generally display. They would vanish. You throw your weapons and they are gone. And sometimes they would appear in the sky, sometimes they would enter the earth. Yes, they can enter the earth also. And suddenly they would appear at the back and tear apart the soldiers. So in this way the entire army of Anaranya got vanished. But Anaranya was advanced. He had signs of celestial weapons also. And he released some of such weapons on ravana. But nevertheless, he also was very mercilessly killed. So he was very weak. So we can understand. Rakshasas are very very powerful. They can conjure various tricks. They can appear, disappear, vanish and do so many other things. Then there are higher species of life. Charanas, Gandharvas, yakshas and Siddhas. Siddhas are so advanced that they need not have any vehicle. Also they can fly with the same body. They are Gandharvas who have wings. Like we see. The instructions are there in Bible where the angel has come. He has spoken few things to some of the disciples. And the angel is shown with great wings. So yes, angels do exist. The satvic personalities called Gandharvas and the celestial musicians they have wings, huge wings. And they fly. But there are Siddhas. Siddhas means here on this planet a yogi has to perform very strict austerity for many many thousands of years. And then he becomes powerful. He can become smaller than the smallest change the size of his body. So yes, we also can change the size of body. But it happens without our desire. We are small in the womb of mother. Then we grow. This growth happens without our control. And of course some protein powder you can take, build up some muscles. But much change cannot be done. But with the help of Yogic sciences you can expand your body. Like anything. You can contract your body at your will. So there is a science by which the body is expanding. If you know what is that science you can make it expand further or you can contract it also. So the Yogis know this art. The Yogis can counteract the force of gravity and make the body very very light. And many such Yogis are there. And who can walk on water. Sometimes they want to attract public attention. But a devotee should be very careful not to get attracted by cheap things. So when Prabhupada was asked so Prabhupada, can you walk on water just like that? So Prabhupada told yes, I can do that. And can you fly in the air to other cities just like that without purchasing a flight ticket? So Prabhupada told, yes, it is possible. But if I start doing that then all my disciples they will ask how to fly to America without a ticket. And they will not ask me how to go to Krishna. So Yogi should be very careful not to get diverted by all these various powers which he gets in course of time. And what is the use of such powers even if you walk on water? Prabhupada explains you can give Rs2 to boat and the boat will let you cross in Mayapur. Still you give Rs2 to cross the river. So something which can be done simply by paying Rs2 to the boat. Why? You have to do a lot of tapasya for that. So one thing is Lord Krishna is telling there is no need to go to the different planets. Because even if you become like a Siddha very very powerful. You have all these material powers and people get bewildered. Some yogi has little power. He can produce some gold. And something about his life he can tell. He can predict. And they tell, oh, you are God. You do not know what is God. These things many people can do. These are not very big magical feats. And only foolish people, they get attracted by magic. So what is the use of such magic when you pay Rs2 and you can just cross the rivers. So after doing thousands of years of tapasya you have just learned how to cross the river. What is the use? But something which cannot be achieved even by such yogis is crossing over. Birth, death, old age and disease. So that is why yoga is meant to solve these biggest problems of life solving birth, death, old age and disease. So Krishna tells even if you go to the topmost planet Abrama, Bhuna, Lokan, Punara, Vartino, Arjuna if you go there, you don't make further advancement. Once your punya is over, you will forget all your powers. Everything will be lost and you will come down again on this planet. So we are eternal. So what is the use of any temporary attainment? We are working very very hard. We want to become celebrity. We want to show up. We want to have many cars, a big house or many houses. What is the use? Because you lose everything and then you can become animal in the same house you have purchased. And another very important perspective Prahlad Maharaj presents he tells us human life should not be used to attain anything which is obtainable in any planet of this universe. Why? Because it is temporary. Is one perspective given by Krishna another perspective very very important perspective which Prahlad Maharaj explains in Bhagavatam Isa. So this point all of you should understand very important, very attentively it's very important point. So Prahlad Maharaj is telling Ara Acharya the liberated personality. Prahlad Maharaj is so advanced that none of the laws of nature act upon him. Boiling oil does not burn him and the snake poison does not act upon him. Poison becomes nectar when he drinks it. He is so exalted. So much absorbed in thoughts of Krishna. And such personality is giving some knowledge. So Prahlad Maharaj tells you are working very hard to become happy in life. But he's telling just like Dukvat the misery comes in our life without any planning. Nobody planned for COVID it came. Misery has come without any planning. Similarly, Anyata Sukham happiness also will follow automatically. Dukhvat, just like the misery comes in our life without any planning. Summers miserable they come without any planning. Winters, extreme winters again miserable come without any planning. In between there is spring autumn that is pleasurable. So there's the course of this material nature. It comes and goes so very easily. We can understand. We need not put any endeavor, the season will change, weather would change, day would come, night would come, summers would come, winters would come. In between little springtime is there, autumn is there. So we are moving from misery to misery in between there is some relief that is taken as happiness. So because it is going in cycle of time. So Prahlad Maharaj is telling bringing this very important factor in our life that is called time. So we do not understand the influence of this very very important factor. Time factor. And Nobel Prize was given to the people because they understood how this time factor is influencing us. And if we don't follow the dictations of time, we don't abide by its orders, then we will increase the sufferings of our life. So they explained every cell in the body is following a biological clock and that follows the motion of the sun. There is a time for cell division, cell growth, cell repair, cell cleansing. At the time of cleansing you are eating, engaging, serve in metabolic activities, then you will have diseases. So they told this nightlife, this social media, other things, they are causing all these diseases we are facing today. Because we are not allowing the cell to operate as per its biology which follows time, which follows the motion of sun. So in this way time is controlling the operations of our body. So as soon as the living entity takes birth, simply if the exact time is known, his future can be very easily predicted. And the total happiness on distress in our life that is fixed, nobody can change it. So Prabhupada, this is intelligence. If somebody tells you even if you work 12 hours or 15 hours, you cannot get more than Rs50,000 in this month every month. So then why would a sane person work hard? So that is what the situation is with all of us. Our happiness and distress cannot be altered by any amount of hard work. Kali Nas, Sarvatra Kabiram assign different degrees as per the activities we have done previously. Just like now, if we contaminate COVID virus, it's just a matter of time, it may manifest in our body. So it is because of some actions we have done in the past. We contacted somebody who was having COVID, we contacted somebody who was in Tamuguna then we just have to wait for our wrong fate. And then if we contact somebody who was in Satvaguna then automatically our life will have a positive result. So as per the actions, previous actions, the happiness and distress of this life, it is fixed that cannot be changed. So people work very hard, want to change it, it does not get changed. And then people come more under stress. So Prahlad Maharaj is telling thus you should save time. So everything will follow, distress will follow. And simply we can understand as soon as you take birth after these many years old age is going to come. So your misery is fixed, isn't it? And at this time you will get married. You can enjoy sensual pleasures. This is also fixed. So youthhood means time of pleasure, enjoyment. Even if you abuse your body it will not respond immediately. Old age all the results will start coming out. How you spent your youthhood then death would be miserable. So just like our major happiness distress can be predicted like this. So those people who are expert in studying time, studying astrology even now there are very expert astrologers. Not many are there but some centers. Like one of our devotees was telling Chidambaram Kanchipuram temples are there. Nadi astrology is there. You simply give your thumb impression and somebody already the sages in the past Agastya and Brigu there are two lineages. So they have described that these people will be visiting this temple, these centers in future. So they've described the name of their parents and everything basis simply the thumb impression. So many people have gone there and simply you give thumb impression and they will read out. So sometimes if you are fortunate first or second script would be yours. Otherwise you have to wait after 1015 scripts. Because it is difficult to get the exact impression. So they will just read out is this the name of your parents? This is the name of your parents. And then when it comes that yes you tell this the right thing then they will describe further things. So this boy, he is very intelligent boy. He went there and he told I was surprised. But they took some 2024 scripts. Because before they could find his script. But his friend went immediately. The second script was his. And they were able to tell so many other things. And we find in Bhagavatam also Shukhdeya Goswami is telling future to Parikshit Maharaj that these many dynasties are going to come. These kings are going to come. These incarnations are going to come. He can very precisely see the time, duration, everything in future. So thus time is a real energy. How time is operating. The advanced living entities can see that. So Prahlad Maharaj is telling please understand this important fact. Just like without endeavor distress is coming to your life in a similar fashion. Without endeavor destined happiness will automatically fall in place. Thus we see some people are not educated and very less educated. But they become very rich and very successful. Some people who are very very educated they struggle to make the ends meet. So thus we can see how destiny is operating. Of course now because everyone is working very very hard. So people are thinking these results which I am getting it is because of my hard work. But that is not fact. So then Prahlad Maharaj tells then what you should aspire for a person who is COVID, who is intelligent, who is philosophically inclined he should aspire not for going anywhere in this material planets some people they want to become happy on this planet. Some people understand there are higher statuses of living, higher standards. So one devotee works outside. He was discussing that prabhu, we were discussing in a forum how to become rich. So one person told that if you want to become rich, first thing you should do is simply leave India. If you live in India, you can never become rich. Go somewhere, go to US, go to Canada. Going there is easy. And become a sweeper there. You'll become very soon very rich. And when there is opportunity, try to find a good job of your field. But just leave India. You go outside, you become rich. And that is fact, actually. So in a similar fashion, there are other planets where facilities are very, very high and people work hard for elevation to those planets in the Vedic times. But Prahlad Maharaj is saying, no, please do not do that. Anywhere you go within these 14 planetary systems in this universe, your happiness and distress is fixed. As soon as you take birth, you cannot change it. Distress will come and mixed happiness will come. Unalloyed happiness is not possible here. So he tells you should aspire to transcend the boundaries of this material universe. Don't have small aims in life. People, the motivational speakers, they tell, yes, think big, dream big. But their bigness is just going to some next planet or satellite which is very close to us, no? What is big thinking? Big thinking is told in the Vedas not to other planet, other solar system, other galaxy. You think beyond the boundaries of the universe and how to go there again. The consideration of time is important. So the time at which you are leaving the body for ordinary people that decides whether they are going to transcend the boundaries of the universe or they are going to appear in some other planet within the universe, what are those considerations? Let us see in the Shlokas now. So here, two ways of passing away from this world are explained. One path, if a person follows, he will come back. Another path, he won't come back. What is that? Yatra kalitwanavritim avritim Chaiva yoginaha prayatayanti tamkalam bakshami bharatarashabha o best of the Bharatas I shall now explain to you the different times at which passing away from this world one does or does not come back. Agnir jotir ahashuklah shanma sautarayanam tatra prayata gachanti brahma brahma vidojanah Those who know the Supreme Brahm pass away from the world during the influence of the fiery God in the light, at an auspicious moment during the fortnight of the moon and the six months when the sun travels in the north. So here it is being explained. If you want to go to the spiritual world, an ordinary devotee can always go. There is no limitation for him because Krishna personally takes care. But other ordinary people, if they have to go, they have to be very particular about. The time at which they are leaving. So there are two segments in a year uttarayan and Dakshinayan so the Vedas mentioned sun is not static, the sun is also moving. So although because we can just perceive relative motion we cannot go outside the universe where we can observe what is moving and what is static. We can never come to know what is moving and what is not. But the vedas explain. The sun is also actually moving. Sun moves towards north, upwards and then downwards towards the south. So the motion of sun towards the north, it is called Uttarayan. So when the sun travels in the north direction upwards. So this is the first condition. If you have left your body. When it is dakshinayan, then no question of liberation. Now when the sun is traveling upwards there is further condition. Then it should be shukla. Shukla means when the moon is bright the fortnight of bright moon if you pass away in the fortnight of dark moon Krishna Paksha then you will not get liberation so it should be first of all, six months are rejected. Only six months are considered of Uttarayan. And in Uttarayan also 15 days are rejected of the month krishna Paksha just Shukla Paksha is taken care the fortnight of bright moon and at that time also not every time you can die agnil joti ahaha AHA means during the daytime at night. If you die in those 15 days again there is no liberation. You have to die at the daytime. At daytime also, there should be influence of Agni Joti. There should be influence of light and fire. So like these various conditions are there and at an auspicious moment there are few auspicious moments. Only at those times, just like the flight departs at a suitable time, if you reach after that, you have to come back from airport. So you cannot stay there. The flight is gone. In a similar fashion, there are various deities which control the motion of soul in this universe. So all these presiding deities of daytime, of fire god and all these deities, they arrange for the passage of the soul. So the passage opens up. So either by practice of yoga system, by controlling your breathing cycles, you finish your breathing cycles at a suitable time when the proper moment arrives, then you can be liberated or accidentally somehow or the other. If at that moment a person leaves the body agnir Jyoti Ahashukla Shanmasa Utarayanam Tat prayata if at that time the body is left, then the person attains liberation. So those special moments which fall under the influence of fire god Jyoti at the daytime in that bright fortnight in the Uttarayan time six months, then only in those moments it is possible to attain liberation. Otherwise dhumo rathristatakrishna shan Masa Dakshinam Tatra chandra Masam jyotir yogi prapya Nivartate Dhumo the mystique who passes away from this world during the smoke rathris the night the moonless fortnight or in the six months when the sun passes to the south or Chandra Masam who reaches the moon planet again comes back. So Krishna is telling here please do not go to moon planet. There is no use because bird, death, old age, disease will not leave you. You have to again come back from Chandra Masam even if you attain moon planet. So people were aspiring to go to moon planet. If you follow Chaturumasya nicely, you can go to moon planet. Four months of tapasya. So Krishna is telling no, please. Although yes, there are lot of pleasures on the moon planet. The living entities, the standards, they are very very high. But please do not try to aspire because you have to come back. So those who go to moon planet or those who pass away when it is smoky, it is night, it is the Krishna Paksha or it is Dakshinayanam. The six months when the sun is passing to the south then the person has to come back. He has to incarnate again. He does not get liberated. Shukla krishna gatih jagata shashvate mate akaya yatyana vritim anyaya Varatate according to the Vedas, there are two ways of passing from this world. One in light and one in darkness. When one passes in light, he does not come back. But when one passes in darkness, he returns. So thus one has to pass at the suitable auspicious moment. When there is complete influence of light, when there is influence of darkness, any of the influence of darkness, then the person has to come back here and it is told here. Because it is truth. It is not that in only one book it is mentioned in Chandogy, Upnishad and other places also same principles are being mentioned. nayata sriti parthajanan yogi mohiyati Kashchana tasma sarveshu Kaleshu yoga yukto bhavarjuna the devotees who know these two password are never bewildered. Therefore, be always fixed in devotion. Now Krishna is telling Arjuna you need not bother a Yogi. Which kind of Yogi that Krishna already has mentioned in the verse number 22 which we covered in previous class, the last verse of the 6th chapter Yogi Nampapi Sarvesham. And in the 7th chapter as well that Bhakti Yogi you have to become Arjuna Bhakta Alabhyaswanyaya. So that is why yogi here means bhakti. Yogi? So yogi yukto bhavarjuna. Therefore, at all times please arrange yourself in Yoga. So Krishna is telling how it is so difficult. You just have to control your breathing process. You have to master your breathing process in such a nice way that just at that moment, proper moment you can leave your life, you can leave your body. So it is very very risky. So that is why Krishna is telling a devotee is not bewildered. He is not very much bothered that I have to wait for the right auspicious time. Tasma sarveshu Kaleshu yogi yuktu bhavarjana therefore, always be fixed in devotion if you are fixed in devotion, Krishna tells tesham ham samuddharta mrityu sansara sagarat I take him out from this ocean of birth and death. So that is why devotee doesn't have to bother but a non devotee he has to be very careful when he's passing. So now, this is the summary of the six chapter of six chapter, seven, chapter, eight chapter whatever we have read so far. Veda shuyagasuchaiva Daneshuyatam atiyatitasaravam idam. Veditva yogi params thanam upayati chadhyam. So Krishna has mentioned so many. Processes we have read krishna is mentioning this yajna that, yajna this process, that process tapasya austerity reading the Vedas so usually a person has to go through all these processes for elevation in Next Life a person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of the results derived from studying the vedas, performing austere sacrifices, giving charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitive activities. Sorry. At the end he reaches the supreme abode. So a person has to read the Vedas very very nicely. He has to go to Gurukul and a person can have understanding of Vedas when he is completely detached. He's having no material enjoyments in his life. Because material enjoyments make a person mad, they are addictive. So that is why and the greatest material enjoyment is family life. So Brahmachari is taken away from the family life. He lives in jungle and then with complete detachment, not indulging in sense enjoyment, he lives very simply, even though he's son of a king in the gurukul. He learns how to serve a guru and do all the menial tasks, take various austerities, go door to door, begging arms. That is very important for Brahmachary in order to maintain humility. Without humility, nobody can have proper knowledge of life. So begging even though you can be son of king, you have to go door to door and beg. And whatever you have begged, you cannot enjoy that food or money. You can bring it to the spiritual master and if spiritual master calls that son, please come and take prasadam then you can take otherwise you have to starve in this way many many austerities in Gurukul disciple is supposed to perform to study the Vedas. Then Vedic knowledge, understanding is revealed that I am not the body. But in today's civilization when people is living in midst of so many attachments, so much of sense enjoyment, then a person is just driven by sense enjoyment, he cannot understand vedas then severe austerities. After that those people who want they are allowed to enter grahast ashram, but then they have to perform sacrifices in household life as well. So Grasta should cook for everyone. He has to maintain Brahmachary he has to maintain Vanaprastha and sannyas ashram also because they are strictly engaged in spiritual affairs, they are not supposed to put endeavor for their own livelihood. The Garasta is supposed to take care of their livelihood also he has to feed animals also who live in his house, around his house people who are moving around his house, he has to receive any guest like God himself. The Vedic principle is graham shatramapi praptam Vishwastam Akuto bhayam. If you receive an enemy also in your house, you should receive him so nicely, in such friendly manner, that Akuta Bhayam, he becomes fearless. So this is how even the Pandavas Kauravas, they are fighting very, very fiercely. And all of them got killed. But evening time, they would be very, very friendly. Similarly, when they were fighting the Bhima Krishna, they all went to fight Jarasandha. So Bhima fought for many days, around 28 days or so. And in the evening, but Jarasand, he was hosting them very, very nicely. So this person has come to kill you, and you also want to kill him. But just see the Vedic culture. Evening time, there is no fight. And if somebody comes to your camp, you receive him like guest in a very, very friendly way. So thus the Vedas, they are so nice. They always want to keep a person very peaceful even at the time of war. So there are proper regulations, proper duties mentioned in the Vedas. And one such very strict duty of householder is that any person who comes to your house, any guest, you have to receive him like God, give him all respects. And then so many other yajnas, he has to perform as Agrasta also. And after that, Van Prastha, when he goes to jungle, then very strict austerity. He cannot wear all these nice cotton clothes. He has to wear tree bark and he cannot shave. He has to eat very simple food. And he cannot live with his family members. Just taking wife is allowed in the Van Prasthashram. And then Sanyas ashram, much more austerity. So, yaeshu, tapasuchaiva, long tapasya, many, many years of tapasya is required. Yajna is required. Studying of vedas is required. Dhanshu. And when you are taking sannyas, all your properties should be given in charity. Whatever you have earned in life, you cannot tell, I am old now I want to enjoy no, now people think, let us have nice policies, nice fixed deposits and mutual fund investment. So that when I am old, I'll go on world tour and enjoy very nice, comfortable life. Vedas tell no sir. When you become old, then you prepare yourself for strict austerities. Now you can eat some nice food items. When you are old, you have to strictly control your tongue, strictly control all the other things, and just wear tree bark, live in the jungle. So this is Vedic civilization. More and more austere as the time progresses. And everything what a person has earned Dhaneshu, he has to give in charity, everything. And then a person gets punya. Punya means pious credits. So just like here, you have to any place, you have to shift. Just like the government has many, many facilities, it gives good big quarters to bureaucrats. So you have to qualify yourself to become bureaucrat in a similar fashion. Such Gandharvaloka Siddhaloka Charan Loka Mahar Loka Janaloka if you have to go such planets which are not destroyed even at the time of universal destruction. If you have to have that facility, then you have to have this punya. These activities you have to do veda Yaggeshu Tapasuchaiva Dhaneshu but here Krishna is telling shortcut atayetit Sarvam Idam Viditva Yogi Paramsthanamupayati Chadhyam a person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of the results derived from doing all such very following such difficult procedures. So just like you earn, you get 1000 rupee. Note then in Rs1000.10 rupee, rs1.05 rupee, 100 200 all the currencies are automatically included. You need not tell oh, I don't have Rs10, please let me have ten rupee. No, if you have Rs1000, everything is included in that. In a similar fashion simply if a person follows Bhakti Yoga he is able to attain a level of happiness which is not attainable by ten rupee 20 rupee by Veda Yagyeshu Tapasu so you get something which is not attainable by all these processes. But you attain something and everything which is attainable by these other preliminary processes. Thus the conclusion of all the knowledge we have read so far in Bhagavad Gita is Krishna is telling to Arjuna Bhakta La Vyasvanaya please become a Bhakti Yogi by following the process of Bhakti, you are able to attain all the perfection that you have by following all the other processes. So thus we are very fortunate. We have come across the right understanding. Let us take advantage. And all this perfection of Bhakti can be very easily attained by chanting Hare Krishna Mahamantra in the association of devotees. So I request all of you please take this process very very sincerely. And again do not forget the influence of time. We have to follow activities very timely. Just like here it is told at this time we have to leave the body for such destination. Otherwise you'll reach different destination in a similar fashion. Our spiritual activities also we should understand. Morning time is very very good. Brahmurta so try to get up 04:00 in the morning. If it is not possible now getting up 04:00 so at least try to get up as early as possible. Take bath twice a day. Morning and evening time has influenced by evening. It makes you thumbsick so minimum. Taking bath twice in a day is very very important. Sleeping early, getting up early in Brahmurta and Brahmurta chanting the Hare Krishna Mahamantra so all these things are very important. And then time will bring few very important days like Dashi So on Ekadashi if you fast and if you chant Hare Krishna Mahmantha increase your reading chanting that day and the days of appearance of the incarnations or devotees of Krishna. So these times are very very favorable for very fast spiritual advancement. So although we don't have to be so particular, I have to wait and leave body at such a time. But nevertheless time plays a very significant role. As long as we are not pure devotees. So we have to take this advantage when the time is favorable. Take advantage when it is brahmurta. So get up early. If you want to make significant advancement in spiritual life, you have to chant offenselessly. Chant in the brahmurta continuously for a long time. Do fasting more reading on Ekadashi days, days of appearance, disappearance. In this way, utilize this time factor and understand that this time factor is powerful. Need not take much tension. Remain satisfied with whatever is coming in our life. Happiness and distress. Understanding it is temporary. Prepare for the eternal life. So we'll finish here and now. I'm sharing this important link here. Those devotees who are new, you must be having questions you want to have. Especially if this is your first session or recently you have joined. So then we have devotees who can guide you very systematically. How to follow the process, how to follow meditation, which books to read, which videos to watch. So this is the telegram link. Here we share all the details of the sessions and I'm sharing contact number also. You want more details? How to follow Krishna consciousness? Read bhagavad gita. We have daily Bhagavad Gita discussion in the evening which is very very powerful and it is recommended for everyone to follow. We understand initially or don't understand, just try to come and within few days you'll start understanding everything. So you can contact on this number. This number is Afrisha Govindrabhu. He will help all the newcomers in all their respects. So please join this channel for more details and read Prabhupada's books."