sometimes small screens, sometimes big screens, theater, we go to movie halls, multiplex.
And although we perfectly know that it is nothing but simply mixing of some lights,
which is happening on the screen. But when you see people staring at those screens,
you see various emotions. Sometimes people are very jubilant, they are very, very happy.
Sometimes they are morose and sometimes there are tears in their eyes.
And some people get so much moved that there have been instances when there are characters
who in the storyline they die and people commit suicide outside in the real world.
They are so much attached to those characters, they get moved by the stories.
So what shall we call such people? Completely ignorant, isn't it? Somebody is dying in the
screen in your TV show or in the movie. So why you are getting sad? Why you are committing suicide?
People die outside. So this is called illusion. And this illusion is so nice. You sit there and
you get absorbed in it and then you start feeling all those emotions.
However, it is not wise to get carried away by such emotions. And we tell, oh, such a fool.
And he jumped from the building because somebody, his favorite character died in the TV episode.
Similarly, just like any sane man will think, oh, this is insanity getting carried away by
some moving pictures on the screen in a similar fashion.
Then light and soul, self-realized souls,
they provide the same perspective that whatever happiness or distress we are facing in this world,
it is of no value. Only a person is greatly hallucinated, captured, and he thinks that this
is reality. He is moved by such emotions. That is why when a person becomes self-realized,
he comes to knowledge. So he does not lament. He is not anxious either. So any kind of anxiety,
any kind of misery that we feel in this world, it is only because of this gross
ignorance and madness. So in that sense, all the living entities here, they are mad
because they are thinking, I am this body and getting carried away by this temporary drama,
which is going on. Oh, my son has died. Father has died. Mother has died. People are enjoying.
People are suffering. Let us plan five year plan, 10 year plan, 20 year planning for giving enjoyment.
So much hard work to avoid the suffering, but both are hallucinatory.
It is simply because of identifying with the bodily concept of life that we are these bodies.
No, these are simply machines. The people for whom we are crying. We are not trying for the people.
We are crying for the machines in which the people were sitting. We are very attached to some people.
We are not attached to the people, to those souls. We are attached to those machines.
Like we have seen in some Hollywood movies, how they make the robots appear exactly look like
human beings. So it's a robot, but you may get attached to it thinking that it may talk very
nicely, just like in IIT Bombay a couple of years ago, they brought I think Sophia or whatever is
the name of robot. So very nice. The texture is just like that of a girl and she's talking very
nicely, appears to be very intelligent. And a person may get attached to such a robot, which is
very beautiful and replicates the spiritual personality. So that is what is happening in
this material world. These replicas robots are there. So many of them and they replicate the
persons and people get attached and they cry. And so that's why it is all madness. Yantra
these are great signs and the greatest people having all the knowledge, they are unaware howling,
crying, enjoying, laughing, becoming happy or sad. It is all madness. So that is why there is very
beautiful sloka in Bhagavatam. So we need not try to go and solve each and every problem.
So we need not try to go and solve each and every problem individually on this temporary platform.
So it is told,
Anartha upasamam sakshad bhaktiyogam adhokshaje, lokasajanato vidvams chakresatvat samhitam.
Anartha upasamam sakshad. So this is anartha, unwanted thing, which we have picked up on our
body. This body, it is not at all required. We can eat, sleep, dance, laugh, have all the activities
without this body. But because we have this body, now we have to suffer from the maladies of the
body also, which are part and parcel of material world. Anartha upasamam means all these miseries
which are very much haunting the human beings and the miseries are always increasing despite
the increment in education, quality of education, quantity of education, technological scientific
advancement, miseries are only increasing. But actually, these are not serious problems.
Bhagavatam is telling these are superfluous. So all these miseries which are superfluous to the
living entities, they can be directly mitigated. How they can be directly mitigated? Bhaktiyogam
adhokshaje by following the process of bhaktiyoga. So this process which Lord Krishna is mentioning
here, it is called ashtanga yoga, it is preliminary to bhaktiyoga. Once a yogi, as we saw in the last
class, he goes to samadhi, he is absorbed in thinking of the Vishnu murti in his heart.
So when the yogi is completely absorbed, he is able to find the super soul, see the super soul,
then he develops attraction for him and he becomes devotee, then he starts bhakti yoga.
So unless a person comes to bhakti yoga, all the yogas remain incomplete. So that is why it is
written all these miseries which are superfluous to us, it is only madness that we feel misery or
jubilation in this world. They can be directly mitigated by bhaktiyogam adhokshaje by following
the process of bhakti yoga, unto whom adhokshaje. Akshaja means something which is perceivable by
the senses, adhokshaje means which is not perceivable by the senses. That means Krishna. Krishna cannot
be perceived by any of the senses, he is completely spiritual. So following the process of bhakti yoga
for that personality who is completely spiritual, inconceivable to the senses.
So that is why the general people, they are unaware of this great science of bhakti yoga.
Therefore, Veda Vyas, Mahamuni, he has composed this Satvat Samhita. Samhita means literature,
Satvat means devotees. So there are various literatures and different understanding is given.
Why? Because people are of different level. Some people are very very tamasic, for them different
scriptures, tamasic puranas are there. Some people are rajasic, for them rajasic puranas are there.
There are 18 puranas, just like there is pre-primary, primary and higher education. Similarly,
tamasic, rajasic and sattvic puranas. However, there is a special purana which is relished by
the devotees and that is called Satvat. Satvat means devotees. Samhita, the literature which is
read, relished by the devotees. That is Shrimad Bhagavatam. So that is why Veda Vyas composed
Shrimad Bhagavatam, Chakra Satvat Samhita. So if you want to mitigate the miseries in our life,
we have to simply do Nityam Bhagavat Sevaya. Regularly keep on hearing this Bhagavat.
So what we are discussing, this is Bhagavat only. Anything which is connected to Krishna, it is
Bhagavat. Bhagawan is Krishna and in connection with Krishna is Bhagavat. Bhagavat is book and
Bhagavat is also person who is connected to Krishna, his pure devotee. Nityam Bhagavat Sevaya.
By regularly serving the book Bhagavatam means the book can be served by scrutinizing reading,
respectful reading and then preaching, distributing that book and the person Bhagavatam, he can be
served by carrying out his instructions. So when Nityam, continuously a person is serving book
Bhagavatam and person Bhagavatam, then he can mitigate all these miseries which are very
superfluous to the living entities. So this is the process of becoming happy in this world. Nityam
Bhagavat Sevaya. So anyway, so Krishna is now describing the position of Yogi who has reached
trance. So whether a person attains this Samadhi by following the process of Ashtanga Yoga or by
following the process of Bhakti Yoga. There are few principles which are very very important and
Srila Roop Goswami has mentioned them if I had recommended previously also to go through an actor
of instruction. If you have read that book these principles are wonderfully described, six principles.
What are those principles? Let us see. First we'll discuss the Bhagavad Gita verse
and then Srila Prabhupada mentions in the purport.
Hare Hare, Hare Ram, Hare Ram, Ram, Ram, Hare.
So Lord Krishna mentions the do's and don'ts of Yoga.
After that Lord Krishna mentioned
the position how a person can reach trance and then Lord Krishna has explained. So this is the
position when you reach trance.
When a person attains this happiness he thinks oh I don't want anything else this is the greatest
this is ultimate and Krishna has convinced now oh this Yoga should be followed because such great
happiness a person obtains and Arjuna you are afraid of some problem if you solve this problem
another problem will come in life but if you reach the stage of samadhi then you will not have
any problem in life very great also happens in your life you will not be disturbed by that
so please endeavor for this trance now how the endeavor should be there what is the nature of
that endeavor that Lord Krishna now explains in these verses. Verse number 24.
One should engage oneself in the practice of Yoga with so this word is very important
with undeviating determination and faith. One should abandon without exception all material
desires born of false ego and thus control all the senses on all sides by the mind.
So very important lines are being mentioned here. Shri Prabhupada explains.
The yoga practitioner should be determined and should patiently
prosecute the practice without deviation. One should be sure of success at the end
and pursue this course with great perseverance not becoming discouraged if there is any delay
in the attainment of success. Success is sure for the rigid practitioner.
The process of bhakti yoga can be executed successfully with full-hearted enthusiasm,
perseverance and determination by following the prescribed duties in the association of
devotees and by engaging completely in activities of goodness. So in the first verse of Uddhashamrita
Roop Goswami mentions first of all what Lord Krishna is mentioning here.
The material senses should be controlled on all sides at all times and all the material desires
should be abandoned. So this thing Roop Goswami also has covered in the first shloka of Uddhashamrita
that you have to control the senses. And in the second verse Roop Goswami has mentioned
six things bhaktir vinasyati which destroy the bhakti. So these are the six principles
favorable and there are six things activities which are unfavorable. You are working very hard,
you follow these principles and then you don't abstain from those principles then your bhakti
is getting destroyed. It is just like heating the water and then cooling it, heating and then cooling
it. It will never boil. So which are those things which take away the heat from our spiritual life
that is
So if you have not read please read again these shlokas, 11 shlokas are very very important to
start our spiritual life. We have to know what is stopping our bhakti which will increase our bhakti.
So atyahar, ahar means eating, ahar means talking. If a person eats too much then that is
impediment in devotional service. So that is why as soon as we decide why should we come now sincere
in devotional service. So a person should try to regulate his eating habits. So he should take
prasadam only and in prasadam also he should not go for satisfying his tongue. Oh this thing is very
nice I have this preference let me eat a lot of it. Then again he will fall to sex desires. If a
person eats very tasty food the next is the senses get agitated. So that is why it is very very
important that tongue should be controlled. So if a person is eating too much atyahar then
it is very difficult to make spiritual advancement.
So bhaktis, danvaraj, pravapa they were not happy seeing the belly coming out of the disciples.
Yes if you have some disease some previous karma is there before becoming devotee it may be difficult
but as far as possible we should control and a big belly is not favorable for spiritual advancement.
And ahar also means stalking. Eating is also hard, stalking is also hard. People want to keep so much
of money for safety. Oh yes this is very nice atyahar over accumulation of resources that means
less dependence upon Krishna. So that is also an impediment in devotional service. So Krishna is
telling you give up the results of your activity but if you don't give up we accumulate and think
that this will protect me how Krishna will protect then this is mentality of just like Duryodhana.
He took all Krishna's army and Krishna told I'll be on one side I will not participate in the battle
and one side is my army Narayani Sena nobody has been able to defeat. Devatas were defeated by the
Sena they got Sudharma the assembly house of the heavenly planet on this planet they defeated them
so such Sena is there on one side. So Duryodhana told what is the use of Krishna? Krishna will not
fight also and so what will that silent counseling do? So let me have his army and Arjuna he was a
devotee he wanted only Krishna and thus we see Arjuna although he was less powerful than Bhishma,
Karna, Drona, great who were very very powerful much more powerful than Arjuna but Arjuna was able
to defeat all of them by Krishna's mercy. So similarly we should not go for material calculations
let me accumulate work very hard and save time for from Krishna consciousness or save resources
for not using for Krishna that is called atyahara that destroys one's devotional service so this is
first thing over eating and over stocking then prayas prayas means over endeavouring working
very hard to increase material happiness or mitigate material distress that is called over
endeavour so over endeavour should be avoided if over endeavouring a person is doing again it means
he is envious of Krishna. Krishna has made some arrangement some kind of distress will come in
a life that is for sure nobody can avoid distress similarly some happiness is also planned by
Krishna's laws so devotee puts regulated endeavour follows all the rules and regulations nicely
within those rules and regulations some misery is definitely going to come in my life
I cannot avoid even without planning nobody planned covid but covid has come and people have
become so much miserable so misery has to come here but a person should stick to the rules and
regulations and thus develop and express his love for Krishna. Krishna I surrender to you I respect
your rules and regulations I will not work very hard against your decisions against your laws
so that is why prayas over endeavour should be avoided
and third thing is prajalpa people are very fond of talking they keep on talking talking
unnecessary and that is why there is so many apps showing you jokes and memes and unnecessary videos
so this is all prajalpa unnecessary talking so we should be very careful if I am speaking something
it should be only about Krishna Krishna consciousness or obviously if we are doing
our job or business or studies for Krishna service and their talking is required that is also allowed
provided the result of that we use for Krishna but any kind of talking which is not for Krishna we
should strictly avoid and sometimes in the name of Krishna consciousness only we do a lot of time
pass and jokes so that also destroys our bhakti so we should be very very careful I should see
if I am talking something is this helping me to advance more in my remembrance of Krishna in my
service of Krishna then I should talk otherwise I should keep my tongue shut simply keep on chanting
the name of Krishna so that is a better process of shutting materially it should be shut so keep on
chanting the names of Krishna keep on chanting the shlokas of bhagavad gita keep on talking about
this philosophy if at all you want to use the tongue otherwise simply chant Hare Krishna mantra
as much as possible but any kind of talk which is not required it is called prajalpa gossip
that should be avoided so gossips also pull us down from the spiritual life
atyahar over eating over stalking prayas over endeavor prajalpa gossips
and niyam agraha niyam agra means there are two words which combine together to make this
niyam agra niyam agra means not following the rules agra means too much following the rules
means following the rules without understanding the purpose of the rules one thing is that people
are not caring who cares so many rules and regulations who bothers like I don't want to
follow then if a person does not follow rules and regulations then he falls down in spiritual life
and niyam agraha he follows rules and regulations without understanding the purpose
scriptures are mentioning you should be truthful and you should do so many other duties but all
these duties are meant to take us up to Krishna consciousness so serving Krishna is the highest
duty so just like Yudhishthir Maharaj through his example although they are in perfect knowledge
they are made to act in a way which is not right for our understanding so Yudhishthir Maharaj he
was perfectly truthful person so Krishna told please tell lie so he should have told lie but
he told no it is immoral I have never told lie in my life how can I do that so he was given
punishment of seeing the hill because he did not tell lie on the instruction of Krishna so this is
called niyam agraha unnecessary following the rules and regulations without understanding the
purpose the purpose is Krishna consciousness of all the rules so for following Krishna consciousness
all the other rules and regulations can be abandoned forget all the rules and regulations
duties and religion this is the conclusion of Bhagavad Gita most confidential knowledge
so a person who does not understand the conclusion and he simply keeps on following the rules and
regulations then that also is an impediment in devotional service so these are the two things
either not following the rules or following the rules without understanding the purpose of the
rule this is called niyam agraha jan sangaha associating with people who are materialists
so whatever desires we have if we analyze in our life whatever miseries we have that is because
of our desires material desires when the desires are not fulfilled then we become miserable
and how did we develop such desires in association of such people who had such desires
they told us told us oh such thing exists you should also work hard for it they give value to
few things and then we got carried away yes i should also have so it is all because of association
spiritualist will give value to something materialists will give value to some other
thing so that is why association is very very important so jan sangha if you associate with
materialists then we come down in our life
and last is greed greed means not remaining satisfied with maintaining body and soul together
accumulating resources for personal enjoyment so these six things we should be carefully
avoiding in order not to get down in bhakti and there are few things these six things which now
mentions which you should do to advance in bhakti and what is that the first thing is enthusiasm
so enthusiasm is very very important in any field so sometimes
the devotees tell oh prabhu we have to preach because whenever you read prabhupada books if
you read bhagavad gita krishna is also telling krishna has described various things in bhagavad
gita so ultimately process of bhakti yoga means pleasing krishna krishna becomes pleased when
you become very dear to him so who is dear to krishna krishna is describing throughout
bhagavad gita especially at the end of 12th chapter devotional service this devotee is very
dear to me this devotee is dear to me who who is always satisfied in every circumstances he's
always dear to me who does not get disturbed by material happiness and distress he's very dear to
me who sees all the living entities equally he's dear to me who offers any
any leaf water such things to me i give him bhakti he is dear to me i become pleased so krishna is
giving various things how he gets pleased by various devotees but then there is one class which
is very dear to krishna and that lord krishna mentions towards the end that is preacher of
krishna consciousness preacher of krishna consciousness who spreads this knowledge to others
to my devotees who explains this most confidential secret knowledge
that all the mizzies are superfluous to you why you are getting so much disturbed by the activities
of this world such a devotee becomes very very dear to me preacher is very dear to krishna
and in kalyuga actually we do not have any other qualification to become dear to krishna other
things are impractical but this preaching is one thing which a devotee can do and thus please
krishna so devotees would ask prahupada that prahupada preacher means so much qualification
is required we have to have knowledge of shastras and other things how can we preach
so prahupada told no only one qualification is required and what is that that is this first
word enthusiasm so i should simply my lord is so great i want to preach the glories of my lord
krishna consciousness is so nice let me spread this krishna consciousness to others let me
distribute these wonderful books this knowledge and everyone will become so happy will come out
of all the miseries of life so simply this enthusiasm should be there prahupada tells
when there is a fire in the neighborhood you want to save your neighbors somehow you'll shout fire
in your own language some language will jump make actions but you would convey the meaning
so prahupada gives example when britishers were ruling india
so they would have many indians as their servants or assistants so englishmen were having shop
and in shop so many monkeys came and they started ransacking the shop so now these people
they do not know english they have to communicate to their master so they went to their master
an englishman and they started jumping and sir sir monkey monkey like they started acting so although
they do not know the language but they are trying to convey
because they are sincere in their purpose so if a devotee is sincere in his purpose of preaching
he's enthusiastic then he will be able to convey the meaning so proper language is not required
proper very great scholarship is not required simply enthusiasm is required if a person is
convinced about krishna consciousness he is enthusiastic to spread it he can do it
only enthusiasm all the other qualities they manifest automatically later
so there is in our movement also we see many many devotees are there and sometimes we see some
devotees are not very qualified also they don't have great material degrees with them they are
not very charismatic and no great polished communication skills also but somehow they
are very enthusiastic and they are able to make many many devotees create a different
different revolution and some devotees on the other hand who are very qualified they
are very intelligent materially and they have read all the scriptures also finished everything
sometimes such results they are not able to produce but although they are scholar
they know many many shlokas but somehow this enthusiasm is missing so the devotees who are
having enthusiasm even though other skills are not there they are able to produce wonderful
results in preaching and there was one there is one nice instance so devotees were once
it was one of the temple i don't remember the place somewhere in the west
so prabhupada was coming out of the temple and along with some devotees and as prabhupada was
coming out immediately one person jumps out of the bushes outside the temple door and
he jumps on the feet of prabhupada and he tells food food food he was telling food
and he was completely intoxicated he was not able to even speak properly and he was telling food
and he was telling food food like that and he kept on clutching the lotus feet of
prabhupada other devotees were this thing what is this madman doing with prabhupada but prabhupada
was very compassionate he was rubbing his head and he was telling it's okay it's okay it's all right
and then that mad person mad man he went inside the temple and now because prabhupada has
caressed him very nicely and so nobody can tell anything so he was sitting and in the temple
he was not able to speak anything not able to even have proper expressions on the face
but he was telling food so devotees fed him very nicely and then prabhupada has given him shelter
so they bade him the next day and they kept on feeding him prasadam slowly started speaking
couple of sentences and the predominant seva of the devotees was distributing the books
and now also that is the focus of the movement the entire vedic culture is lost because the
gurukul was stopped this knowledge was not otherwise this knowledge was very common knowledge
especially in the everybody was taught because the education system got lost the
literatures were not read people have fallen from the spiritual consciousness
so now the way to re-spiritualize the society is to distribute these books on a very very large
scale so the focus of all the activities in our movement is nothing but distribution of books
so the devotees would do the morning program and then entire day the other things were not there
so more so they were completely doing the book distribution only so when devotees were going
to sit in the van and going out for book distribution suddenly this devotee he also
jumped in the van and i will distribute books will distribute books two three words he was able to
speak like that and devotees told him what he will do but nevertheless he was very determined
so anyway they took him for distribution and one bag was there with him and when the devotees
came back this devotee comes with an empty bag and they were thinking what this mad person he
has thrown the books away who can sell so many books but then other devotee told no no i saw him
actually he was giving out books to some people so then they asked him what have you said how can
you give so many books so he told no i told pravapa saved me pravapa saved me only few words he was
able to speak pravapa saved me so simply by speaking this pravapa saved me he was able to
give out so many books to the people and then slowly he started becoming more and more sane
and after few years the devotee one devotee was describing the incident he went to the temple and
he saw that the same devotee was giving bhagavatam class he was speaking bhagavatam
he became so advanced and couple of years ago that devotee passed away chanting Hare Krishna
Maha Mantra with beads in his hands so his spiritual life became successful so this is called
a person who is dumb he can become great eloquent speaker a spiritual master is merciful
so even though this devotee was not able to very clearly pronounce any sentences but he
was able to distribute wonderfully the books and then he became very great so why enthusiasm was
there even though much sanity was not there but enthusiasm i need to do this thing so this is the
key a person will be successful in his preaching endeavor if he's enthusiastic so this enthusiasm
is required in devotional service just like if a person gets offer from big company there is
celebration if he gets a seat in a good college there is celebration the newspapers media they
cover who has got this seat in this college and he sings and dances because he knows
even before entering that office or college because i have got selected i've got this chance
my life is successful that is what they think then when they enter they realize there is no success
hmm my life is successful they are so enthusiastic about
going to that place in a similar fashion we should understand this service of krishna as soon as we
get we should be very very enthusiastic oh wow i have got this service my life is successful
little chance of service if we get for krishna that is a very very great opportunity
so in this mood we should do any service of krishna with great enthusiasm we can do it
in dullness also just like sometimes the parents force the children to go to school they are very
dull and some are very enthusiastic so that is why this attitude is very very important of enthusiasm
all the devotional services whether we are doing chanting or i am going to associate with krishna
it is so nice when i'm hearing bhagavatam reading bhagavatam bhagavatam is incarnation of krishna
puranam brahm samitam brahm samitam means incarnation of krishna so this bhagavatam is
also incarnation of krishna and if we read about any personality in the bhagavatam any devotee
we are personally associating with the devotee we are personally associating with author shila
pravupada vyasa dev narad muni pravupada writes narad muni has kindly appeared in the pages of
bhagavatam so there is no difference between the activities narrations of the pure devotee and their
personalities so when we read bhagavatam i am going to associate now with the devotees i am
going to associate with vyasa dev pravupada krishna narad muni maitreya vyasa dev vidura and all these
devotees so i should be very very enthusiastic a little touch with these devotees is sufficient to
completely purify ourselves sadhu sanga sarva shastrakoy but this consciousness is important
if we are enthusiastic then it will act if we are in that consciousness yes now is the time for my
personal association then it will act i am hearing lecture of pravupada so i'm personally
associating with pravupada personally pravupada is willing to give me some direction spiritual
life is never by chance whether we hear any recorded lecture or the recorded words if we
are reading that that is a mercy krishna spiritual master they are personally trying to give us the
instructions so if we are picking up in that enthusiasm in great eagerness then we will
actually be able to associate with them so this mood is very very important and if it is sadhana
anyway we have to do anyway we have to read anyway i have to chant i have to fill the sadhana score
every day then that is not very good attitude so a person should be very very enthusiastic
then next next is nishchayad nishchay is translated as determination and confidence
so a person should be very very determined also yes enthusiasm is there i want to do
but then there will be so many impediments the nature of this material world is that people
should be kept in illusion because we desired that now i have to be very determined to show
that no i don't want this illusion i want reality so the rules and regulation should be adhered to
with great determination and there could be many many impediments spiritual life may seem
spiritual life may seem impossible in the beginning so determination the
shri laprabhupad gives example as for the determination one should follow the example
of sparrow who lost her eggs in the waves of the ocean so sparrow laid her eggs on the ocean side
and ocean claimed the eggs sparrow challenged the ocean please return my eggs ocean did not bother
so this is a history this really has happened so then the sparrow she began to pick out the water
in small beak and she threatened if now you're not giving my eggs i will empty you completely
how sparrow can empty the ocean but this news of sparrow's determination to empty the ocean
it reached to different places it reached garun deva also and garun deva he is most powerful
vaishnava personal carrier of lord vishnu so garun dev told he became compassionate he told ocean
please return the eggs so immediately with folded hands ocean came out returned the eggs of the
sparrow so sparrow was directly not qualified to empty the ocean but by this determination
she got the favor of her personality who is capable of drying up the complete ocean
so in a similar fashion when we read we hear bhagavad gita it may seem a very daunting task
oh my god controlling all material desires i'm not able to control one desire controlling all
the senses stopping all desires i should not desire anything for my satisfaction controlling
all the senses all the vegas veg of watch ovega manasakro the vegam jiva vegam oh my god impossible
i cannot control all these drives yes it is not possible it is very very difficult task
actually it is impossible task krishna tells mama maya duratya yeah that is why people are
trying so much for happiness they are not becoming happy mama maya duratya nobody can
overcome my energy because it is my energy but mama eva prapadyanti those who surrender unto me
or mommy part via pasharithya those who take specific shelter of me or my pure devotee they
can cross over this material energy illusory energy very very easily so we will not even realize
so just like one devotee shared that he was suffering from tremendous pain and one month he
was on bed rest he could not move and then he approached a doctor doctor gave some recommendations
what to eat what not to eat and in two days he got well no pain in the body so a person who has
knowledge immediately he can give relief so that is why on our strength it is not possible but with
determination even though the effort may seem impossible we should follow the rules and
regulations and third thing is patience we may fail perseverance is very very important
initial failures are expected so we should not lose heart because our process is coming directly
from god it is not hit and trial this technology is not good let us see something else if it works
no this has worked in the past for lakhs of years right from the beginning satyuga lord brahma
practiced the same principles manu followed the same principles we was one followed the same
principles prahlad maraj amrish maharaj dhruv maharaj everybody till recent history till at
the time prahupada went and the westerners and even today people are following and they are getting
success so that is why even great decoits like jagai madhai valmiki they all became pure devotees
by following this process so this is extremely powerful process given by krishna so the process
is perfect i simply need to persevere stick onto it so despite many many numerous failures a person
should not give up because this is the only way and success is sure if a person sticks onto it
however if we want to feel tangible advancement then we have to be very very determined so if we
are determined prahupada was asked by a devotee that prahupada why my eye is so strong so prahupada
told because your determination is not strong so if you are determined then maya cannot touch and
if you are not determined even krishna cannot save krishna cannot save me he saves basis our
desires if you are not very determined to get saved why krishna will interfere so if you are
not determined to be to defeat this illusion come to the platform of reality spiritual life
then even we cannot expect any help from krishna so even though we cannot follow all the rules and
regulations means following the rules and regulations with great enthusiasm yes i'm
very enthusiastic yes what does it mean enthusiasm i should keep on jumping enthusiasm prahupada
defines please read the nectar of instruction that entire purport endeavoring with intelligence
enthusiasm is practical activity i am very enthusiastic about settling in us
then a person should do some activity he will find a job in us he will work very hard to get
the clearances get visa green card something so he should be very he should be doing some activities
to that end so similarly enthusiasm utsaha means a person should be engaged in positive activity
that following the rules and regulations so rules and regulations may be very very difficult
also in the beginning so we can fix as per our standard that is why we tell you please
does not matter you're not able to chant much fix your rounds minimum recommendation you cannot
follow up 16 rounds then whatever you can you fix that and don't reduce come what may fix
principles as per your caliber at this level and protect it with your life now i will not
reduce it come what may let me not sleep let me not eat but let me fulfill by basic quota which
i have decided this is called tapasya and there would be test maya is a personality durga devi
she is a very tough examiner she doesn't want people to disturb krishna so that is why before
we are able to come in touch with krishna and perceive krishna directly strong test will be
there as soon as you are determined nishcha i want to follow there would be test immediately
but still we have to try to stick on to it and follow the rules and regulations which we have
decided with great determination this much i have decided this i will follow regularly every day
without fail so decide as per your level but follow the rules and regulations whatever you
have decided very strictly and then slowly we'll come to the minimum standards which are
recommended automatically strength will come but if we waver sometimes too little less then it is
not good and we so we have to follow rules and regulations with enthusiasm determination and
perseverance patience and sangatya gath these things we will be able to do keep up our enthusiasm
follow the rules and regulations when we leave the association of materialist or we live in the
association of devotees so that is why prabhupada told we are opening so many centers so that we
can give a chance to people to live with devotees living with devotees is very very important
so there are various etiquettes in which a person has to deal with the vaishnavas
and a person has to serve the vaishnavas the devotees of krishna to advance in spiritual life
so some devotees they ask chatanee maha prabhu how do we identify a devotee you are telling we
have to keep association with devotees and we have to serve the devotees we have to offer this
respect to devotees but how do we understand who is a devotee then chatanee maha prabhu told it is
very easy so devotee can we see the dress oh he's wearing dress of a vaishnava dhoti kurta white or
saffron and he's wearing vaishnava tilak kanthi mala so he's a devotee no bhakti vinod thakur
tells he can be kali chela he's having dress of a vaishnava he could be servant of kali purush
sin personified so by dress we cannot make out if somebody is devotee dress anybody can wear
raman came in the dress of a sadhu so by scholarship we can make out no scholarship is
also completely different from being a devotee people are very many good scholars are there
they may not be devotees so he's living in dham no we'll find people of not good character also
living in dham pravapattas monkeys also live in dham they eat only fruits and they live naked so
like this we'll find many people sadhus who are living naked and eating only fruits but monkey has
lot of female monkeys lives in the company so thus we cannot make out by external things if a person
is very externally appearing renounced if a person is living in a holy place if a person is wearing
some sadhu dress if a person is a great scholar no so how we can make out who is a devotee very
simple a person who does not live in the association of non-devotees he's a vaishnava he's a devotee
just like a sane man he cannot live with mad people he will be compassionate it does not
mean devotees has a stone heart no a person is very very compassionate but he cannot live with
madmen in a similar fashion devotee means he is a knowledge he is on the platform of absolute truth
so he cannot tolerate living in the association of non-devotees so if anybody is very comfortable
living with non-devotees they could be our they could be anybody then it means that we are also
mad only mad people can comfortably live with madmen a sane person will not be compatible
so simply by seeing this we can understand and we also test like this how a person is advancing
his spiritual life how much he is liking the company of devotees and how much he is
comfortable in the company of non-devotees so Srila Prabhupada mentions when you are very very
anxious just like a young girl or boy are anxious to meet each other when you are very anxious to
live with devotees then you are liberated so how much anxious we are becoming to live in the
association of vaishnavas that is the barometer of our liberation so sangat yaga simply by this
we can measure our spiritual advancement and spiritual advancement of anybody how much
comfortable he is in the association of materialist so the first qualification of devotee is he will
not at all be comfortable in the associate he cannot tolerate the company of materialist
so sangat yaga leaving the association of materialist and this is very easily possible
when a person is living with devotees we have to live with somebody we have to talk to somebody we
need to have a social circle man is a social animal people say so if you are living having
a society of devotees then it is very easy to avoid sangat yaga association of materialist
sato vritti means having sattvic activities so for a sattvic person there is a time to sleep
there is a time to get up there are few food items which are recommended for him to eat
there is a way he talks there is a way he walks that is called sato vritti having sattvic tendencies
having sattvic lifestyle engaging completely in activities of goodness so these are the six
principles which a devotee if he follows his success in spiritual life is guaranteed he should
be very very enthusiastic utsahat nishchayat he should be very very determined whatever rules
and regulations i've decided i will try to protect it and follow it with great determination dharyat
failures are there i should not leave the process tat tat karma pravartanat follow the rules and
regulations very nicely in the association of devotees and sato vritti i should engage completely
in activities of goodness these things are important for swift advancement in bhakti yoga
so these six principles are very very important and other six principles which i discussed just
those should be avoided in this we are devotees very very safe in a spiritual life and very soon
he will meet success then what will happen gradually
gradually step by step with full conviction one should become situated in trance by means of
intelligence and thus the mind should be fixed on the self alone and should think of nothing else
so just see he it is not blind faith which is recommended here with full conviction person should
become situated in trance by means of intelligence so nobody's telling intelligence please keep
aside and then you so it is not possible to remain situated on spiritual platform without use of
intelligence so by means of intelligence if a person is intelligent he can follow if he is not
intelligent as we have discussed simply remain engaged in service of krishna and
krishna gives the suitable intelligence however our process bhakti yoga is also called buddhi yoga
use of intelligence that is very very important so by use of intelligence just like
now we are situated we always try to chant harikrishna mantra we try to read bhagavatam
hear this thing why because by using intelligence we think oh this is important this is true this
is nice so in this way by means of intelligence a person can remain situated on spiritual platform
and the mind should be fixed on the self alone and should think of nothing else self alone self
means krishna and self means ourselves also both are called self atma and it is one and the same
thing just like when there is no sun you cannot see the sun you cannot see yourself also absolute
darkness and as soon as we go out in the sunlight we are able to see the sun we see ourselves also
so seeing krishna is the primary requisite of seeing ourselves so mind should be fixed on
krishna then we'll be able to see ourselves also so without any deviation with the use
of intelligence mind should be fixed on krishna
so
from whatever and wherever the mind wanders due to its flickering and unsteady nature
one must certainly withdraw it and bring it back under the control of the self so mind will
definitely wander and mind should be brought back under the control of self so the process
which is recommended here is stopping the activities and sitting in one place but a
devotee can do this very very easily by engaging all the senses in the service of krishna
by chanting loudly Hare Krishna Maha Mantra just like Prabhupada gives example car passes by
immediately our attention goes there we are hearing a lecture we see some sound our attention may go
there similarly when we are always chanting Hare Krishna automatically it will pull the attention
and this krishna sound is non-different from person krishna so we are focusing on krishna
by always chanting Hare Krishna Maha Mantra so this is very easy way of keeping the mind always
in krishna by chanting his name so this is the process of bringing back the mind in Kali Yuga
so mind will wander as soon as the mind is wandering start chanting Hare Krishna Hare
Krishna always and the mind will come and again again under control
the yogi whose mind is fixed on me
verily attains the highest happiness so when the mind is by practice repeated practice mind
is brought back and the mind becomes fixed on the name of krishna on the form of krishna
then yogi attains highest happiness by virtue of his identity with brahm when he understands
I am not body I am spirit soul brahm he is liberated his mind is peaceful his passions
are quieted and he is freed from sin so we are suffering only because of sinful activities of
the past because of this the mind is disturbed people ask why my mind is disturbed it is because
of this rajasam sinful activities produce rajas and tamas and then the mind is disturbed so when
the mind is by practice of yoga system fixed on the sound of krishna on the lotus feet of krishna
then the mind is very very peaceful passions are quieted and the person becomes freed from
all sins and thus he does not suffer he is liberated
