So, we discussed this shloka in the previous class, Samalosh Trashma Kanchana.
Krishna told how it is of prime importance in yoga practice to control the mind.
Controlled mind is friend and uncontrolled mind is the greatest enemy.
And when a person becomes a yogi, how do we understand?
So, as soon as a person is connected to the absolute truth, immediately he understands,
oh, this is illusion, what I was perceiving as reality, thus pebbles, stones or gold,
it is all the same for that person or whatever is perceived as gold.
Some scholarly achievements and great physical strength or amassing huge fame or anything
which is considered very, very valuable.
A devotee or a yogi, he does not give any value to it.
It is all the same for a person, anything of this material world.
The water of the dream, the pebble of the dream, the gold of the dream, it's all the
same.
Similarly, the yogi realizes the dream-like situation of this temporary material world.
It is not hallucination, but it is temporary.
So, it is just like a dream.
Anything which is temporary is a dream.
So he regards everything as same.
So this is also needing some spiritual advancement, but there is another elevated stage.
And what is that?
That Krishna explains.
We will see now in today's verse.
Verse no. 9,
Surin mitrari udhasina.
Lord Krishna is mentioning.
Surin mitrari udhasina madhyastha dveshyabandhusu sadhusvapi chapapeshu sambuddhir vishishyate.
Surit means your well-wisher.
And what kind of well-wisher?
Very sincere well-wisher.
Krishna tells, suridam sarva bhuta naam.
Do not think I am an autocrat, a dictator, but suridam sarva bhuta naam.
I am the best well-wisher.
And there is mitra.
Mitra means benefactor, a good friend.
So friends are of various categories.
Somebody can be just an official friend.
And you know, sometimes such friends indulge in doing wrong activities also together.
He's that kind of friend for his gratification.
And there is official friendship.
You do it for business purpose or various other reasons.
But then surit is a friend who can even chastise you, scold you or beat you for your benefit.
That is called well-wisher.
Surin mitrari udhasina.
A person is said to be still further advanced when he regards all the honest well-wisher,
friends and enemies, the envious, the pious, the sinner and those who are indifferent and
impartial with an equal mind.
So we all have experience of such category of people.
We understand somebody is my well-wisher.
The parents may scold the child and may sometimes give some punishment to the child.
But all that so-called suffering which is imparted by the parents is because they are
surit.
They are well-wishers for their children.
And then there are some friends and then there are some enemies who are going to inflict
some trouble upon you.
Madhyastha advesya bandhusu.
There are some people who are mediators, who are neutral.
Some countries neutral towards some countries, some countries are envious.
In a similar fashion, we have experienced some people are friendly to us, some are envious
and some are neutral.
Sadhusvapi cha paapeshu.
Some people are sadhusu, very, very pious, always do good works.
And there are some papis, sinners.
So we have different reaction towards this different category of people.
So I was speaking to one devotee yesterday.
He was expressing his concern that how he's not able to have such a vision for his boss
who is behaving very, very in a biased fashion in office.
And he's creating so much trouble for the poor devotee.
He has been in depression for some time.
So we have different behavior.
Somebody is not very good with us.
Then we also don't feel good about him or her.
Somebody is very good.
We like to be in company of such people, enemies we want to defeat or kill and friends we want
to keep.
We want to increase.
If somebody is neutral to us, we'll be also neutral to them.
Sadhusu people who are pious, good people, we want there.
We have good feelings for them.
People who are sinners doing wrong activities, crime, we have ill feelings for them.
But these are not the characteristics of a yogi.
Samo buddhir vishyasyaate.
Samo buddhi means he is having equal disposition towards all.
A person is said to be still further advanced.
One level of advancement is he's seeing stone, gold, pebbles at the same level.
But then a person is still further advanced when he regards all honest, well-wisher, friends
and enemies, the envious, the pious, the sinner and those who are indifferent and impartial
with an equal mind.
So we all are suffering not so much because our needs are not being met, but we are suffering
because the other person is more expert in making the needs meet than us.
So this is called competitive spirit.
So this entire competition is actually killing us day and night and it is pushing us so much
into hard work and thus making all of us restless and making our lives troublesome.
So why this is happening and we talk of big, big things, isn't it?
A society which is creating competition left and right and the parents which are forcing
their children to score best in the competition and till death he has to face competition
and competition is increasing, the exams are increasing, the frequency is increasing.
So we want a society having a lot of competition and then we tell, oh, we should have love,
we should have friendship, we should have brotherhood.
And again, people have no common sense that these both things are not compatible together.
How you can have love and competition at the same time?
How you can have brotherhood and competition at the same time?
If I love somebody, if I love my brother, if I, if I, mother does not compete with child
for the limited food that is there in the house.
Mother will offer all the food to the child and mother or the parents would stay hungry.
If there is limited money, they would like their children to be well dressed, but they
can tolerate somehow.
So this is called love.
But in society, do we do like that or there is only one position available?
Oh, my friend, you're also competing.
I'm also competing.
Let me pull out from exam.
You please get my seat.
It is very nice.
No, we compete and not just we compete when other person is able to have or do better
than us than our heart burns like anything.
This burning of heart is creating all the problems.
So we want competition and we want love.
So that is not possible.
So the basic cause of our problem is we will probably always pointed out is our lack of
Krishna consciousness.
It is not that any third person can put us into difficulty.
No, we do not have Krishna consciousness.
Krishna consciousness means I see I have my phone and there is one camera in the phone
or this phone has been made by somebody, camera has been made by somebody cannot develop automatically.
This wonderful machine is there having wonderful camera.
Somebody has made this also.
So he is creator.
He is a proprietor.
We are all coming from him.
We are his parts and parcels.
So everyone is relative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
So in that sense, we are all brothers and sisters.
So how can I be envious of part and parcel of Krishna?
I cannot love a person and hurt any of his limbs.
In a similar fashion, if I am hurting anybody, I am envious of anybody.
It means I'm envious of Krishna.
So this Krishna consciousness is not there.
There is so much competitive spirit in the society and the hearts are burning.
And this competitive spirit is the cause of all troubles.
So that is why love is not possible here in the society where there is a lot of competition.
So you may ask, is there anybody who practices all these principles?
It appears just like a theory.
It may appear like a theory when our hearts are sinking deep in this mire of competitive atmosphere.
Otherwise, there are many great examples.
One example is that of Haridas Thakur.
Another example is that of Jesus Christ and all such great devotees.
So the two constables were there.
They were given the task of beating Haridas Thakur to death.
And just imagine if somebody is trying his level best to kill you
and how much hatred, envy, curses will come from our heart.
And pure devotee, nobody can harm Krishna's pure devotee.
So Haridas Thakur, when he was in danger, these people were coming and attacking
and trying their level best to kill him.
But Haridas Thakur was such an advanced devotee.
His desire, he was having such a strong desire to protect these constables.
He was knowing that Krishna will not leave them.
So when he was being beaten in the market,
intense prayer in the heart was when we are being beaten in such a situation.
If we are, we would pray, Krishna, please save me, kill these people.
But he was praying, Krishna, please save these people, please save these people,
please do not do any harm to them.
And he was playing the role of their well-wisher.
Similarly, Jesus Christ was praying for the good of those people who prosecuted him.
So despite all the persecutions, all the wrongdoings, all the enmity,
the devotee of the Lord, a real yogi, he is treating everyone with an impartial mind.
He sees everyone as intimate relative, intimate friend.
But yes, the behavior should be according to the body.
I understand that everyone is part and parcel of Krishna,
but somebody is in snake's body, so I should maintain distance.
But I always remain their well-wisher.
I always pray for the well-being of snake, even though snake may bite me.
I always pray for the well-being of all the living entities.
The other living entity may curse me, may praise me,
may criticize me or be non-different towards me.
So this is possible only with a yogi.
So just see this position of yoga is so nice.
So if the entire society starts practicing yoga,
how nice would be the consciousness?
Everyone becomes well-wisher of every other person.
Or let the society not become.
We will be situated in such a situation where nobody can disturb us.
Somebody is trying to curse us, kill us, attack us,
we will be completely undisturbed and in bliss.
This is a very advanced platform of yoga.
And it is not that it is only theory.
Otherwise Bhagavad Gita would not have been spoken just before this Kali Yoga.
So Bhagavad Gita has been kindly given to us
so that we also can reach this platform.
This is real competition.
So this competition is totally waste of time
where you try to become very famous, very advanced, collecting money.
So this is not going to fetch us anything.
We leave everything, again start the cycle in animal form, bird form,
worm form or maybe in some heavy,
in some heavenly planet having some Devata body.
But this is all of temporary returns.
So this is real competition.
I should work hard to come to this platform.
This is very much possible in all the ages.
Different yoga practices are mentioned for different ages
and in Kali Yoga, a very simple process which we all practice,
the chanting of the holy names is mentioned.
However, this stage we have to aspire to attain
and I should see how much everyday I am progressing to achieve this consciousness
that I am able to deal with everyone with an equal mind.
Now, people are celebrating that,
21st June it is, I think, Yoga Day, International Yoga Day.
And they think, yes, now we are going to do yoga, whole world is doing yoga.
Krishna does not know, please stop, stop.
Just see, there are few elements.
Ashtanga Yoga, there are 8 elements.
And before you start doing any breathing exercise or asanas or XYZ,
first of all understand Yama and Niyama.
Yama means these things you should not do, prescription and proscription.
To treat a patient, both things are given by the doctor.
In a similar fashion,
Krishna is telling,
A transcendentalist should always try to concentrate his mind on the Supreme Self.
He should live alone in a secluded place and should always carefully control his mind.
He should be free from the desires and feelings of possessiveness.
Before we start doing yoga, these do's and don'ts are important.
You do this practice of Dhyana, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara, sitting anywhere.
It is not possible.
No success will be attained.
So what is required?
Yogi Yunjita, Yunjita means must concentrate in Krishna Consciousness.
How?
Satatam, constantly.
Srila Prabhupada explains very beautifully in the purport.
Krishna is realized in different degrees as Brahma, Paramatma and the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Krishna Consciousness means concisely to be always engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
But those who are attached to the impersonal Brahma or the localized Supersoul are also partially Krishna Conscious.
Because impersonal Brahma is the spiritual ray of Krishna and Supersoul is the all-pervading partial expansion of Krishna,
thus the impersonalist and the meditator are also indirectly Krishna Conscious.
A directly Krishna Conscious person is the topmost transcendentalist because such a devotee knows what is meant by Brahma or Paramatma.
His knowledge of the Absolute Truth is perfect whereas the impersonalist and the meditative yogi are imperfectly Krishna Conscious.
So here it is being explained.
Yogi Yunjita Satatam, the first line.
A yogi should always concentrate in Krishna Consciousness.
So what is Krishna Consciousness?
It means it is realized in three degrees, Brahma, Paramatma and Bhagavan.
Krishna has continuous energy emanating from his body.
That is called Brahma Jyoti.
So some people are concentrating on that Brahma Jyoti and their aim is to go and mix in that Brahma Jyoti.
They are so much fed up of this material life, they tell, no, no, I do not want to enjoy anymore this life.
So their aim is just to focus and whatever your consciousness is at the time of death, next life you take that birth.
If you are thinking about Brahma Jyoti always, meditating on that, then you go and merge in Brahma Jyoti.
So they don't want to take any more birth, they are called Mumukshu.
And then Paramatma, people who are still further advanced, they understand this Brahma Jyoti light is coming from a person
and that person is present in our heart.
This is higher realization.
So first level people, they only understand this world, entire world is illusory and there is no happiness here.
So as long as you live here, you would suffer.
So go and merge in Brahma Jyoti.
And when you are further advanced, you understand, no, this entire Brahma Jyoti, entire world is coming from a person
and that person is situated in our heart.
And then they try to discover that person in the heart and try to merge in the person that is called Paramatma vadis.
And then those people who are still further advanced, they understand the God who is reflected in all our hearts, who is present.
All these forms are expanding from one supreme person.
He is called Bhagavan.
Bhagavan means, Bhag means opulence.
Shannam bhag ithingana parashar muni, Ved Vyasas father has defined.
There are six kinds of opulences which attract others towards oneself.
If a person is very wise, if a person is very rich, if a person is very very strong,
if a person is having very good looks or if a person is very great renunciant.
These are the things which are very very attractive.
Bhagavan means possessor, Balavan who possesses strength, Bhagavan who possesses opulences.
So the supreme personality of Godhead is not some, that is why people should think why Bhagavan is called Bhagavan?
What is the meaning of this name?
And they tell Bhagavan means only light.
It means they do not even have basic understanding of Sanskrit.
So if at all you call the absolute truth Bhagavan,
then you should understand Bhagavan means one who possesses.
Bhag means opulences, somebody is possessing beauty.
This is one opulence, somebody is possessing so much of wealth, that is another opulence.
Somebody is possessing renunciation, detachment from his possessions.
So these are all personal traits, personal features.
Somebody is having opulence of knowledge.
Somebody is very very wise and they are having opulence of strength.
All these six opulences when a person has incompletion, he is called Bhagavan.
This is described by Parashar Muni, father of Ved Vyas.
So some very rare people understand this Lord of the heart is also coming from, expanding from
that personality who is full of six opulences.
Very beautiful, very strong, very wise, very much detached from the entire creation what he has created.
He is called Bhagavan and the devotees are able to realize Bhagavan.
So Krishna consciousness actually means always engaged in transcendental loving service of Bhagavan.
But not everyone can do that, can realize that.
So some are attached to Brahma Jyoti and some are attached to Paramatma.
So they are also Krishna conscious, but partially not completely Krishna conscious.
If somebody is seeing sunlight, he is also seeing the sun because sunlight is coming from sun,
but he is not directly seeing the sun.
But whatever it is, in this shloka yogi yunjita satatam,
whether you are Gyan yogi aiming for merging in Brahma Jyoti,
you are Ashtanga yogi, you are willing to merge in Paramatma
or you are Bhakti yogi, want to remain engaged in loving service of Krishna.
Whatever you are, yogi yunjita satatam,
in next paragraph Prabhupada is explaining, you can see on the screen.
Nevertheless, all of these are instructed here with to be constantly engaged in their particular pursuits
so that they may come to the highest perfection sooner or later.
So this is the first condition.
When you are engaged in yoga, you should be constantly engaged in it, satatam.
So somebody asked Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Maharaj,
that Bhakti Siddhanta Prabhupada spiritual master,
that Bhakti Siddhanta Maharaj, do we always have to chant Hare Krishna Maha Mantra?
So Maharaj replied,
So the instruction of Bhagavad Gita,
satatam kirtayan tumam, leaves no scope for speculation.
So in 9th chapter, verse no. 14, Lord Krishna mentions,
satatam kirtayan tumam, if people ask where in Bhagavad Gita it is written you chant the holy A's,
please open chapter no. 9 and verse no. 14 and show it on their face.
See here it is mentioned, you ask them where is your method recommended.
They may quote some verses from Sankh Yoga or chapters like that,
but they don't quote the complete Bhagavad Gita,
because whatever we are reading now,
all the do's and don'ts expresses of Ashtanga Yoga,
Arjuna will reject at the end of 6th chapter.
And then Krishna will tell Arjuna, it is alright,
this yoga is not possible, you are already best yogi, whatever you are doing.
So these instructions are given just that we can understand,
when Arjuna could not follow, how can we follow?
So that is why there is very nice reference,
in the most confidential knowledge, chapter no. 9,
this instruction is given satatam,
satatam means always keep on chanting the names of Krishna 24 hours.
So this should be our, it is very very tough,
that is, that everyone understands,
but nevertheless, it is our aspiration and we should try to attain that platform,
24 hours engagement.
So any kind of yoga you wish to perform,
people think, oh, I practice yoga everyday 2 hours,
or maybe 4 hours, and they think,
oh, I will achieve perfection of yoga by practicing this my entire life.
No sir, it is not possible,
because you are not following yam niyam,
first of all, you have to understand constantly,
any kind of practice, a person should be constantly engaged,
and then sooner or later, he may attain perfection,
but no other material engagement,
just yoga, yoga and yoga day in and day out,
a person has to perform satatam.
The first business of a transcendentalist is to keep the mind always of Krishna,
and then how clearly Prabhupada is mentioning,
one should always think of Krishna and not forget him even for a moment.
We understand what is a moment, isn't it?
So in a few moments, I could not remember Krishna,
then we will not attain perfection.
When the mind is completely absorbed in Krishna,
that a person does not forget Krishna even for a moment,
then svarupa siddhi, then a person understands and not just understands,
he sees that I am the soul within the body,
what is my real position, what is my relation with Krishna.
This position is revealed when a person is not forgetting Krishna even for a moment.
So that is why human life is a rare opportunity,
it should be some freedom we have in human form of life,
if I want I can lift my hand, take it left and right,
I can sit, stand, walk or talk,
this much freedom I have,
but I do not have freedom,
how many hours, days or years I am going to continue here,
anytime it can stop,
I do not have control over many big diseases that may come,
suddenly paralysis can come,
mucus can choke up my throat, I can die,
so that moment I do not have control,
so whatever control I have been given,
I should plan my life, routine my day in such a fashion
that I should not forget Krishna even for a single moment.
Concentration of the mind on the supreme is called samadhi or trance,
in order to concentrate the mind one should always remain now.
Next Krishna is mentioning,
first of all Krishna has mentioned,
please understand yoga you have to perform constantly,
you want to focus on Brahma Jyoti,
you do not have knowledge of Krishna,
constantly you should focus on meditate on Brahma Jyoti,
you cannot think of Bhagawan,
but you have knowledge of Paramatma,
constantly focus on Paramatma within the heart,
and if you have knowledge of Krishna,
constantly chant His name, engage in His service,
but constant thinking is important.
Now if a person has understood this thing,
then everything, all the concomitant conditions,
they follow automatically,
which are those conditions?
Now, in order to concentrate the mind,
when you can have concentration,
that is the people go to library for studying,
why? Because that is suitable place.
One should always remain in seclusion
and avoid disturbance by external objects.
He should be very careful to accept favorable
and reject unfavorable conditions that affect his realization.
So one should avoid disturbance by external objects.
Rahasi means he should remain in a secluded place.
So if I am sitting in my house and I am doing yoga,
so that is not possible.
That is why everyone would leave the house
and they would go to jungle and in seclusion,
it is very very important.
And there also a person should remain alone,
no disturbance should be there by anything external.
And you have controlled your senses,
but sense objects are more powerful than the senses.
That is why we see, we have heard in the history,
many yogis, they followed very nice brahmacharya,
they are there in the jungle,
but then Indra gets scared,
they are doing so much tapasya,
they may become qualified to take my position,
so he is not willing to help them advance in their tapasya.
So all these positions which we have now in this life,
it is because of tapasya which we have executed now or in previous lives.
So when the apsaras they come, heavenly beauties,
the rishis they get disturbed.
So because Krishna is mentioned in second chapter,
the sense object is more powerful than the senses.
So that is why please go away from this place
and go to the jungle, go to the mountains,
where there is no scope of being disturbed by the sense objects.
And some rishis like Saubhari Muni or the Prachetas,
they would go and meditate deep within the water.
We will die within the water,
but these sages are so advanced,
algae and so many other plantations have come up on their body,
but he is just sitting there inside and meditating.
So to perfect spiritual life,
so much such great tapasya is required.
It is not easy because Krishna has created this illusion.
How we can think that I am not the body,
this world is temporary?
No, Krishna has created this illusion
that the world appears to be real and we feel that I am this body
because obviously we wanted.
So now we have to show with determination.
Now I want to understand reality.
So to understand this reality,
it is not easy.
A lot of tapasya was required within the water.
They would keep sitting for many, many days and years altogether.
So ultimately the conclusion is because I have to focus constantly on Krishna,
therefore nothing should disturb me.
So going to a secluded place is very, very important.
It cannot be performed in cities or villages or home.
No, it is not possible.
And one should be very careful to accept favorable and reject unfavorable conditions
that affect his realization.
We choose things which are good for body.
We try to avoid things which are not good for the body.
That should not be the criteria.
We should choose things which are good for concentrating my mind upon Krishna.
As I explained before,
when Prabhupada's factory was collapsing
and Prabhupada had, I think, some assignment in Madhya Pradesh for preaching.
And then his son is calling,
Father, please come here.
Our factory is collapsing.
So he is calling,
No, son, you please come here.
There is a very nice opportunity for preaching.
So Prabhupada saw that this is the preaching opportunity,
time to and opportunity to focus the mind completely on Krishna.
So this should be chosen.
So therefore we should choose things whenever you want to make any decision.
Don't think, oh, foreign land is so nice.
Let me go to foreign.
Let me have a lot of money and then I'll make my children also study abroad.
And then it would be so nice.
We would be happy.
So if you are planning happiness in this world,
first of all, this concept should be removed because Krishna has declared
this world is full of Dukkha.
So if anybody is trying to search Sukkha here,
he or she, they are mad persons.
When Krishna is labeled as Dukkha,
we should stop trying to become happy in this world because that is not possible.
God has designed this world as the call him a house of miseries.
So wherever we go and the more we forget God,
the more we are absorbed in this house of miseries.
So happiness is not possible in that way.
So therefore our planning should be aware.
Should I go?
Where is it possible to think of Krishna always in this way?
Choose your location.
Always choose a location where you can have very nice association of devotees
and engagement in the service of Krishna.
Choose a profession which does not give you so much name,
fame, money that you may forget.
Krishna name, fame, money, everything is acceptable.
Provided it is there, which can help us to remember Krishna very, very nicely.
We are not against anything that Rup Goswami is explaining next,
as I'll come to it.
So and in perfect determination,
he should not hanker after unnecessary material things
that entangle him by feelings of possessiveness.
So first of all, the condition is Satatam.
Always you have to focus to focus on Krishna.
Always you should not, you should be there in a secluded place.
And then,
Nirashi means a person should not have material desires.
Should not hanker after unnecessary material things.
Now, Prabhu, what is the definition of necessary?
I need at least one Mercedes, one BMW, one Land Rover is also okay.
So this is my necessity actually.
So what is my necessity?
Anything which is
required for keeping body and soul together, that is called necessity.
If by taking this new car, your soul leaves the body, then please take the car.
If by taking that promotion or acquiring that business
or getting that new film role or project,
your soul is leaving the body, then please take these things.
But otherwise, if soul is willing to remain in the body,
then we should not be hankering after such things because they are unnecessary.
The soul should be kept in body that much endeavor we should do in life.
And then rest of the balanced time we should save for Krishna consciousness.
So Nirashi, a person should be free from material desires,
which are unnecessary, not required for keeping body and soul together.
And why? Because a parigraha, when you acquire anything material,
then you get feeling of possessiveness.
That is why Bhakti Siddhanta Maharaj would tell, please do not possess a house
because house is a very strong entanglement and attachment.
That is why old people, they are not able to leave their house
even though everyone has died in the family and the people are living away.
They cannot go live with the relatives, so much attached to the house.
So just see how spiritualist conception of life is totally different from that of materialist.
And there is example of such consciousness.
There was one sage, he was having a very, very long life.
How long his life was people tell?
If I remember correctly, as many hairs are there on the body of
a cow or something.
These many kalpas he will live.
What is kalpa? One kalpa is a day of Brahma.
One day of Brahma means
1000 yugas.
1000 yuga means 44 lakh years.
44 lakh years into 1000 years is one day of Brahma.
And this is called one kalpa.
And how many hairs are there on the body of cow?
These many kalpas the person is going to live.
So 44 lakh years into 1000 into number of hairs that you count.
So that was the lifespan of this great sage.
And this great sage was without any hermitage, without any cottage.
He was just roaming on the bank of the river or like that.
And then some of his disciples, they thought, oh, let us have at least a
sattvic kutty, a small kutty, straw hut for our spiritual master.
He's roaming here and there. He's having such a long life.
So when they started constructing, he told, what are you doing?
Why are you wasting time? What is this?
No, no, we think that you are not having even a shelter for yourself.
So you are having such a long life. Please accept this offering.
He told, are you foolish?
We are here for a very, very short time.
We are eternal beings.
So why should we waste any moment in achieving something temporary?
So all this is not required. Please do not do that.
So just see what is a consciousness.
He's going to spend millions and trillions of years.
And then he does not want any shelter for himself.
That is why the sannyasis, they are not supposed to stay.
The typical sannyasis in the Vedic culture under the same tree.
The second night, one night you have stayed under a tree.
Next night you should sleep under a different tree because this material nature is so designed.
We get entangled to anything and everything.
We will feel attachment for the tree or this is my tree.
I am comfortable sleeping under this tree only.
So that is why this feeling of possessiveness is very, very strong.
Anything I use, I start feeling it is mine.
So yogi should be completely free or whatever money I am having, it is not mine.
If I'm living in some house, this is not mine.
If I'm having some people around me as relatives, they are not mine.
Everything, everybody belongs to Krishna.
But this consciousness is not easy. A devotee can have this consciousness.
So that is why others, they are not supposed to have any possession at all.
As soon as you possess, you will feel possessiveness.
So live alone in secluded place, do not have any material desires which are unnecessary.
And a person should be completely free from possessiveness.
All these perfections and precautions are perfectly executed when one is directly in Krishna Consciousness
because direct Krishna Consciousness means self-abnegation, wherein there is very little chance for material possessiveness.
So Srila Rupa Goswami, he characterizes Krishna Consciousness in this way.
So all these things which we have discussed,
it is perfectly executed only by a devotee, only by a person who is perfectly Krishna Conscious.
Because if an ordinary yogi, he is telling, oh, I'm leaving my family.
I am leaving my house, leaving my kingdom and I'm going to jungle.
So he's committing two mistakes in such an attempt.
One mistake is that he thinks that this kingdom belongs to me.
So I am leaving now. I'm walking out. I'm leaving.
This money belonged to me. So I have left the money.
This family belonged to me. So I have left it.
So this is wrong in the first place that these things belong to you ever.
Only when something belongs to you, you can leave it.
So that is why those people who are leaving, they are also an illusion.
When Bali Maharaj, after offering entire universe to Krishna, then he offered himself
because he thought there are two things in the world, property and the proprietor.
So this entire property Krishna has taken, now I am offering myself.
Krishna, please take me also.
So from an ordinary vision, it appears to be an amazing thing.
He has offered his entire kingdom, whole universe, and he has offered himself also.
Very nice. But his wife, he offers very wonderful prayers to Vamandev.
And he tells how ignorant, foolish my husband is.
He's telling that property proprietor both belong to you.
He's thinking still that he is the proprietor of this entire kingdom or universe.
And thus he's telling he has audacity to offer himself, feeling that he is the proprietor.
So this is ignorance.
So that is why there is the first mistake when you leave anything.
That something is belonging to me. Oh, when did it belong to you, sir?
You are thinking that it is belonging to you. That is an illusion.
And another mistake is there when you are going and sitting in forest or on a mountain.
So does it mean mountain belong to you that you are using mountain for your practices?
You are drinking water from the river. Does it mean river water belong to you that you are using it?
So these are the two mistakes.
So that is why the Vedas mentioned very beautifully.
What is perfect renunciation? What is perfect non possessiveness?
Roop Goswami Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's immediate disciples and very, very advanced and powerful yogi
who would sleep just for one, one and a half hours, maximum two hours at night.
Every night would sleep under different tree.
Just 500 years ago, they were present in Vrindavan.
They are the founders of the Vrindavan that we see now.
What is right renunciation?
When one is not attached to anything, but at the same time accepts everything in relation to Krishna,
one is rightly situated above possessiveness.
On the other hand, one who rejects everything without knowledge of his relationship to Krishna
is not as complete in his renunciation.
Although that is also good, but that is not completion of renunciation.
He is not having perfect knowledge that everything belongs to Krishna.
So therefore a Krishna conscious person well knows that everything belongs to Krishna
and thus he is always free from the feelings of personal possession.
So as such, he has no hankering for anything on his own personal account.
He knows how to accept things in favor of Krishna consciousness
and how to reject things unfavorable to Krishna consciousness.
So that is why a devotee, he can very nicely live in a family if it is required for service of Krishna.
And if that is botheration in the service of Krishna, then he can eat everything.
Just like Pandavas, they accepted everything.
They accepted opulences which a yogi would never accept.
They are afraid they don't touch money, Maya and Maya.
They will start calling.
But Arjuna, he got an entire mountain of wealth for Krishna.
They were dealing in all these riches and power and all these things which can contaminate a yogi.
But they were living among great opulence, among many many wives and among many associates,
much property because by the virtue of being in Krishna consciousness,
they accepted everything for the service of Krishna.
And as soon as Arjuna brought the news, Yudhishthira Maharaj got to know their worshipable Lord.
He has left the planet.
Then immediately without caring a fig, a bit of what will happen to our kingdom,
what will happen to my relatives and this thing, immediately they walked out.
Not they, he walked out, Yudhishthira Maharaj walked out.
And he did not care, my brothers are there, somebody is there, I am, what is going to, he walked out.
And then he was walking out, other brothers saw, he is walking out.
Yes, this is the way, we should also walk out.
In this way everyone started walking out.
So they are there for the service of Krishna.
When Krishna's service is not required, then they may not accept the things.
So this is the mood of a devotee.
He always accepts things when it is required for Krishna's service.
And they reject something which is taking them away from Krishna consciousness, which is not required.
So this is called the best yoga.
So very very difficult, the Yama Niyama itself is so difficult.
No possessiveness, no material desires, go alone in a secluded place.
Constant engagement in yoga, 24 hours.
That is why some people ask, Prabhu, is that meditation good or not?
Two days, three days I was completely silent or 10-15 days, sometimes up to a month I was silent in this thing.
But then are you able to do it satatam constantly?
No, we cannot do it, then you will never achieve success in yoga.
Satatam is required.
But Krishna consciousness is so nice, it can be executed satatam.
24 hours in wakefulness and even in sleep.
Then further dos and don'ts.
So these dos and don'ts were common for all the yogis.
Now because Krishna is specifically mentioning Ashtanga yoga now in this chapter, some specific instructions are given.
To practice yoga one should go to a secluded place, again Krishna is mentioning.
In sanctified secluded place, sanctified means sattvic.
Not alone crematorium is also secluded, no not crematorium.
You should go to a pure place, sattvic place, mountains, jungles.
You should go to a secluded place and should lay kusha grass, kushotaram on the ground and chailajina.
Cover it with a deer skin and a soft cloth.
The deer skin is used because it produces some smell which keeps all the insects and reptiles away.
So they don't disturb the yogi.
The seat should neither be too high nor too low.
And should be situated in sacred place that we saw.
The yogi should then sit on it very firmly.
So some people tell you I will follow aghoris and learn yoga from them.
Please understand they are not yogis.
It should be shuchav deshe.
They are tamasic worshippers of ghosts and other spirits, very very materialist.
So yogi means shuchav, clean place.
Then yogi should sit on it very firmly.
Not that shaky, sometimes here, sometimes that.
People cannot sit even firmly for few moments.
How this yoga would be possible?
Sit on it very firmly and should practice yoga by controlling mind and senses.
Purifying the heart and fixing the mind on one point.
Srila Prabhupada explains, sacred place, shuchav deshe refers to places of pilgrimage.
In India the yogis, the transcendentalist or the devotees all leave home
and reside in sacred places such as Prayag, Mathura, Vrindavan, Rishikesh and Haridwar.
In solitude practice yoga where the sacred rivers like the Yamuna and Ganges flow.
So leaving home is a compulsory situation for following yoga.
Here we can very clearly see.
And further in the coming verses also Lord Krishna mentions.
But often this is not possible specially for westerners.
The so called yoga societies in big cities may be successful in earning material benefit
but they are not at all suitable for the actual practice of yoga.
Cities, you cannot do it.
So one who is not self-controlled, whose mind is not undisturbed cannot practice meditation.
So you must be wondering how this is possible.
How we can leave house, family and go there and do all these things.
So that is why in Brahan, Narada, Puran and Kali Santaran Upanishad and many other places
the same thing is mentioned.
Please find another such shloka for any other spiritual practices.
So anybody who is teaching us some Vedic mantra, traditional Vedic spiritual practices of yoga, dhana, kriya, pranaya
making spiritual life success, kindly ask him or her a reference.
They will utterly fail to produce any single reference.
There is no reference.
If you want to believe in shastras, any scripture, the Vedas, then there is no other way.
You can clearly see in this shloka.
In this age of coral hypocrisy, the only means of deliverance is chanting the holy names of the Lord.
Three times it is mentioned.
And three times negation is there.
Kali means in Kali Yuga.
In other yugas, yes, it is possible.
There are many bona fide ways.
But in Kali Yuga, there is no other way.
There is no other way.
There is no other way.
It is clearly being Harir Naam, Harir Naam.
Chanting the holy names of Hari is the only way.
There is no other way.
So wherever we are situated, we can remain situated in that place.
And just there are some Yama and Niyama for chanting the holy name also, which we have discussed in the class.
We'll keep on discussing following those rules and regulations.
We have to just engage in chanting the Hare Krishna, the chanting, the chanting, the holy names of Lord.
So very, very intimidating Yama and Niyama for Ashtanga Yoga.
So that is why it is best not to open that yoga matter because we are not going to have any success at all by doing that yoga.
And there are some more intimidating but very, very important practices for Ashtanga Yoga, which we are going to see in the next class.
