There is this one verse we could not complete. We were supposed to do it in the last class, so let us see it also.
It is also very important. Krishna is describing the consciousness of a perfect yogi.
How does he perceive the world? What is his vision?
So the last verse goes like this.
आत्मु पम्येन सर्वत्र सम्म् पश्यतियोर्जुना सुक्षम् वायदिवादुक्षम् सयोगि परमुमतः
Translation. He is a perfect yogi who, by comparison to his own self, sees the true equality of all beings, both in their happiness and distress, O Arjuna.
Srila Prabhupada is explaining.
One who is Krishna conscious is a perfect yogi. He is aware of everyone's happiness and distress by dint of his own personal experience.
The cause of distress of a living entity is forgetfulness of his relationship with God, and the cause of happiness is knowing Krishna to be the supreme enjoyer of all the activities of human being.
Krishna is a proprietor of all lands and planets. The perfect yogi is the sincerest friend of all living entities.
He knows that the living being who is conditioned by the modes of material nature is subjected to the threefold material miseries due to forgetfulness of his relationship with Krishna.
Because when in Krishna consciousness is happy, he tries to distribute the knowledge of Krishna everywhere.
Since the perfect yogi tries to broadcast the importance of becoming Krishna conscious, he is the best philanthropist in the world, and he is the dearest servitor of the Lord.
In other words, a devotee of the Lord always looks to the welfare of all living entities, and in this way he is factually the friend of everyone.
He is the best yogi because he does not desire perfection in yoga for his personal benefit, but tries for others also.
He does not envy his fellow living entities. Here is a contrast between a pure devotee of the Lord and a yogi interested only in his personal elevation.
The yogi who has withdrawn to a secluded place in order to meditate perfectly may not be as perfect as a devotee who is trying his best to turn every man toward Krishna consciousness.
So here Prabhupada is explaining there are two kinds of yogis. One is a yogi who follows this procedure which Lord Krishna is describing in this chapter.
He goes to a secluded place and he works for his personal elevation. That is also very good. At least he is not engaged in never satisfactory material activities.
He is in knowledge. He understands regulating the senses as the aim of life, and he goes to a secluded place. That is good.
But he is not as good as a yogi who, so this is also a very important shloka, who is a perfect yogi. A perfect yogi does not mean generally people think yogi means they are self-interested.
They have left the whole world and they want to advance. Yes, some yogis who are not very advanced, they are definitely self-interested in their own advancement.
However, Lord Krishna here describes in this shloka. So all those who are willing to become yogi, who want to identify a yogi, can understand from this shloka what is the consciousness of perfect yogi.
Who by comparison to his own self,
means by comparison. So he understands how without this practice of yoga, I was suffering so much.
So he also can feel the suffering of all other living entities and thus Prabhupada very beautifully describes the last line.
Devotee who is trying to trying his best to turn every man toward Krishna consciousness.
So yogi who has withdrawn to a secluded place may not be as perfect as a devotee who is trying his best to turn every man toward Krishna consciousness.
So if you want to become perfect yogi, it is very, very important to feel sympathy with other living entities and also help them to advance in this process of yoga.
A person who is only self-interested, he needs to still advance further in his process of yoga and then feel the pain of all the living entities.
Next shloka.
So the beginning of this chapter, it captures the essence of entire yoga system.
And the essence of entire yoga system is to control the mind.
And we discussed how people in America, people are very fond of doing yoga.
Thousands of yoga societies are there and patents are there, but they want to do yoga in order to enjoy life better.
And just like today's topic is mind control.
So we got the feedback that many people are interested in controlling the mind.
Yes, so people are interested in controlling the breath.
People interested in controlling the postures, body and mind so that they can enjoy the senses very, very nicely.
But actually they are defeating the purpose of yoga.
The purpose of yoga is to control the senses.
And mind is the most important of the six senses.
In our education, we have knowledge only of five knowledge acquiring senses.
But in Bhagavad Gita, it is mentioned.
There are six senses. Mind is called the sixth sense.
Through mind we control all other senses.
So the purpose of entire yoga system is to control the mind.
Why mind control is required so that you can become peaceful?
No, peace is not the process of yoga.
As we saw in the previous verses, if you have read the purport, yoga is meant for...
To enjoy happiness, to enjoy extreme happiness.
People are so much harassed, they just want relief.
Just like when Britishers were there, all the slogans were freedom, freedom, freedom.
But freedom alone is not sufficient to give us happiness.
A person is being beaten in the jail left and right.
For him, freedom is the slogan.
But there are so many people who are not in the jail, are they all happy?
No, they are not happy.
So in a similar fashion, those people who are under great harassment of material nature,
they just want to control mind.
Oh, please give me peace. My mind is giving me so much harassment.
But actually, peace also does not satisfy us.
That is why when people go for retreats, three days, four days, ten days,
they would not talk anything, would not indulge in sense enjoyment and all these things.
So mind becomes peaceful.
But then they are again dissatisfied.
They cannot tolerate that peace much.
They come back and again start indulging in the activities of pleasing the senses.
And the sensual activities are always disturbing.
So again, they go back in order to have control of mind, peaceful mind.
They live in the mountains, some ashramas, and then no enjoyment, no communication,
no television, no Android, no YouTube, no videos, eating just very simple food without salt and this thing.
And then they try to control, have a peaceful mind.
Mind definitely becomes peaceful.
That is why they go there.
But then why, sir, do you come back?
If that thing is so nice, live entire life there.
No, continue.
So thus peace will not satisfy us.
And since enjoyment anyway, it is harassment.
Krishna has told in the Bhagavad Gita.
So all of us who are very new in the session, who are willing to control the mind, please understand.
Controlling the mind so that I can enjoy very, very nicely.
It is told.
What is the kukti?
Kukti means hen.
So we read the story in our schools also.
So one person had a hen.
And obviously, why do people keep hen so that they can have eggs?
So hen was giving nice eggs and he was very glad.
Oh, this hen is so good.
It gives me so many eggs.
But then there is some fault in one portion of the hen.
The back part is very good.
It is giving me eggs.
But this front portion is not good.
The mouth, because I have to feed and spend so much in feeding, taking care of this front portion.
So let me remove this front portion, the head, which consumes so much of my money and needs maintenance.
Let me just keep the back portion, which is giving me eggs.
So is it possible?
No.
So this is called ardu kukti nyaya, half hen logic.
So half hen logic is that I want to remain in this material world and I want great pleasure, great enjoyment also in my life.
So that is not possible.
You want to remain in this material world and you want peacefulness also?
That is not possible.
So that is the nature of this place.
Prahlad Maharaj very beautifully describes in Shrimad Bhagavatam 7th canto.
Sada samudvigneshu dhyam asad grahat.
Everyone is constantly agitated here.
Mind is always agitated, disturbed.
And then when the mind is agitated, we think, OK, let me attain this position.
Let me attain this platform.
And that will give me relief from the agitation of mind.
We all have experienced this, right?
Always we are thinking, OK, this position, this position, if I reach that will remove the agitation of my mind.
I'll be more happy and peaceful.
But then when we reach that position, we realize the agitation is actually more in.
It has increased all the more.
And then we think, oh, let me go there, that position now.
And then the agitation increases even more in this mind is always agitated.
So this agitated mind.
If we follow simply the dictates of the mind, it is going to get more and more agitated.
Sada samudvigneshu dhyam asad grahat.
So all this agitation of mind is because of.
Ignorance of the reality of life.
So what is that reality?
It is very beautifully described by.
Jada Bharat to Maharaj Rahugan.
Who is Jada Bharat? Who is Rahugan?
So this place where we are living, this planet was called Bharat Varsha.
Now it has become just a small country because many factions, they claim their independence and now they are known by different names.
But earlier this entire planet was called Bharat Varsha.
So there was a ruler of this Bharat Varsha. His name was Maharaj Bharat.
That is why you must be wondering why this name Bharat Varsha is there.
Why the name Washington D.C. is there? Because George Washington was a personality.
The places are named many times after great personalities.
Similarly, this place was called Bharat Varsha because of Maharaj Bharat.
Maharaj Bharat was ruling the entire planet, such a powerful king.
And Maharaj Bharat was so advanced in knowledge that he gave up the entire kingdom.
Can you imagine? People are not willing to retire from job in 60 or 70 years till their deathbed.
They wish to continue.
But then Maharaj Bharat renounced everything at the age of 24 years.
24 years. Just imagine so much entire world to enjoy.
There is no competitor.
But then he left to perfect his spiritual life, to control his mind and senses.
And when he was practicing in similar fashion, control of mind and senses, he was almost perfect in his spiritual life.
And then, unfortunately, he developed some attachment for a deer cub.
And because of that attachment, Maharaj Bharat could not finish his spiritual life.
And he also became deer in the next life.
This is a great secret which determines our next birth, which people are highly unaware of.
And that is,
Whatever are our remembrances at the time of death, we will attain the next body of similar nature.
Now people are very fond of keeping dogs because families are not there.
In western countries, especially, they make their children independent after 13-14 years.
And there is hardly any connection.
So people live alone, they keep dogs.
And all their attachment is directed towards a dog.
And invariably, they have to become a dog if they have died thinking of a dog at the time of death.
So we should be very, very careful what is our object of attachment.
That is why Vedic culture means practice detachment.
After 50 years, you go to jungle.
Don't remain attached.
So human life is meant to come out of this.
Because we have accepted this temporary body, soul is eternal.
So soul wants eternal position, eternal happiness, no disturbance.
But this body is temporary.
Asat, asat means temporary.
So asat grihat, we have accepted, we are permanent, but we have accepted something temporary.
Just like I am permanent, I will continue to live.
But if I accept something which is temporary, I accept a temporary job, anytime I can be kicked out,
then I am always in anxiety, anytime boss can kick me out or I am living in a temporary place,
then I am again in anxiety.
That is why people want to have their own house.
We want permanence.
So because we are permanent, but the body is temporary, we are always disturbed.
So when a person is completely detached from everything of this place,
then only he can attain a position in which there won't be any this temporary acceptance of temporary bodies.
So Bharat Maharaj got accepted, got attracted towards a deer, and thus he became a deer in the next life.
And then he was aware, he was advanced spiritualist, he could remember his past births.
So in the next life, he took birth as Jad Bharat, means mad Bharat.
He was knowing previous two births, what had happened, and I became attached.
Now I don't want to attach myself to anything in this material world.
So if anybody is very intelligent, anybody is strong, stout, rich people get attracted.
So you told in this life, now I don't want to be rich.
I don't want to prove myself very intelligent, although he was the most intelligent person.
So he started behaving like a mad man, so that nobody appreciates me, nobody gets attracted towards me.
Jad Bharat. Jad means dull, dumb fellow.
So this Jad Bharat dumb fellow, he was behaving like a dumb,
so that he can just focus on lotus feet of Krishna and not miss the chance of making his spiritual life perfect.
So when he was living in this way, totally dependent upon Krishna,
whatever food Krishna would send, he would take, whatever task Krishna would engage, he would do.
And once it so happened, the king was going and he wanted a man.
There are four men required to carry the palanquin of the king.
One person was missing, so he wanted a stout man, strong man to carry.
So they got him. Jad Bharat, he was strong in physique.
And Jad Bharat came, he started carrying the king on the palanquin.
And because a pure devotee is always, as we saw in the previous verse,
he understands the distress of other living entities by dint of his personal experience.
He understands that somebody steps upon me, I feel a lot of pain,
so I should not step upon other living entities.
I don't want to be killed, other living entities similarly don't wish to be killed.
So, so many ants were there when he was carrying the king.
And pure devotee is very, very compassionate.
So he was limping so that he may not trample upon some of the ants and insects.
So the king became very angry.
Oh, you foolish fellow, you do not know anything, you don't know how to carry the palanquin.
And then he spoke something that you servant, you should know how to take care of the king.
And then Jad Bharat, out of his mercy, he spoke a stream of beautiful shlokas,
which you can find in Shrimad Bhagavatam.
And then Jad Bharat, he revealed a very nice shloka to the king, Maharaj Rahugan.
And this shloka is there in the fifth canto of Bhagavatam, 11th canto, verse number 16.
Jad Bharat says, very nice shloka it is.
नयावदेतन्मनात्मलिंगम् संसार्तापः अवपनम् जनस्या
यच्योकमोहामयराग लोभा वैरानुबन्धम्मताम्विधत्ते
Means, the soul's designation, the mind, is the cause of all tribulations in the material world.
As long as this fact is unknown to the conditioned living entity,
he has to accept the miserable condition of the material body
and wander within this universe in different positions.
Because the mind is affected by disease, lamentation, illusion, attachment, greed and enmity,
it creates bondage and a false sense of intimacy within this material world.
So problem, problem, so many problems are there.
We think financial problem is there, the government is not good, the weather is not good,
administration should improve, bureaucracy should improve, judiciary should improve,
legislature should improve and education system should improve,
the road should improve and so much improvement we want.
And we think these are the sources of my problems.
But here a very, very beautiful thing is being revealed by a self-realized personality
who is free from the laws of nature.
And what is he telling? He is telling the real cause of distress is
the soul's designation, the mind, is the cause of all tribulations in the material world.
So similar shloka is spoken by many, many self-realized souls.
You'll find this in Bhagavatam.
So you should finish quickly Bhagavad Gita and then move on to Bhagavatam.
So Bhagavatam is the postgraduate study where Bhagavad Gita ends, Bhagavatam begins.
So everywhere they are telling not this, not that, not some people, not enemies,
not the external conditions, but this mind is the cause of all happiness,
not the three modes, nothing, simply this mind.
So the way you train your mind will define your happiness and distress.
So the source designation, the mind is the cause of all tribulations in the material world,
not few tribulations. Here it is mentioned.
Mind is the cause of all tribulations in the material world.
So all the problems that are happening in this world, that is only because of mind.
And as long as this fact is unknown to the conditioned living entity,
as long as we do not know that the problems are not outside, but the problem is here.
As long as this fact is unknown to the conditioned living entity,
he has to accept the miserable condition of the material body
and wander within this universe in different positions.
Now this is a great hallucination in which all of us are in and we do not realize.
What is this hallucination?
And fortunately, now we have modern science.
With the help of these scientific discoveries and gadgets and technology,
we can very well realize the situation of soul as different from body.
So one of our devotees, he made me wear a VR headset.
And then it was my first experience a couple of years ago.
And then once you wear it on your head and you feel like you are standing in a different place,
left, right, top and bottom, and you are perfectly seeing.
It is not that you are not seeing, but what you are seeing is not reality.
It is virtual reality. It appears like reality.
You can look at the top. You'll be seeing very clear sky and very bright sky, clouds above,
although it could be very, very dark, actually, in reality.
You see left, you find some people and talking to you, standing next to you.
You see right, you find a tree, you find many small hens and pigeons around you.
So this called virtual reality. When you are wearing that, you can see everything in all directions,
but you cannot see yourself.
You cannot see your hands, your legs. You cannot see the reality in which you are situated.
Similarly, this is just a small machine which just fits upon the eyes.
Krishna is telling in Bhagavad Gita,
Prahlad Maharaj is telling,
We have accepted this machine, temporary machine upon ourselves.
Yantra, it is a machine.
So it just doesn't fit upon the eyes, but fits upon all the senses of the soul.
The soul has got eyes, but now the soul is seeing through these eyes.
When this camera doesn't work, we cannot see.
So that is why people go for eye replacement, different fit camera I want.
So the soul's senses are covered now by this dress.
And just like somebody covers your tongue with a tape and then gives you night sweet,
please enjoy nice Gulab Jamun.
Shall we be able to enjoy? No.
Because the tongue has been rolled in a tape.
In a similar fashion, because the soul has been rolled with this gross body,
this pus, mucus, bones, blood, these substances,
the soul cannot enjoy actually spiritual substance.
So that is why we have to come out of this body or spiritualize this body
in order to relish that pleasure for which we are hankering.
That cannot be enjoyed with these senses of this machine that we have got,
this body which we have got.
So this is called self-realization, removing this VR headset,
removing this VR body which creates a virtual reality.
We are seeing everywhere. We are seeing, oh, I am sitting in a nice place.
This is India. This is Bombay like that.
But this is illusion.
Because of this body, we are perceiving this world in a certain way.
I am different from the body. I cannot see myself.
And if a person's mind is uncontrolled,
...
So if a person is very much attached,
just like if a person is very much attached to virtual reality,
he can never enter real reality.
He will not be able to cook real food for himself, will not be able to eat this thing,
he will be absorbed in different vision and will continue his suffering.
In a similar fashion, we will not be able to elevate ourselves to real life
as long as we are attached to this virtual reality.
So all the problems, all the distress is happening only because of this mind
which traps us, which keeps us attracted to this virtual reality.
And thus, a person is ...
...
A person was taken a vow, I will remain very much attached to this place
of my dwelling.
Such a person ...
cannot see ...
his self-identity, his real position. Such a person cannot see.
So that is why this great thing is being revealed.
There are no problems here. All the problems are because of this mind
which makes you identify yourself.
That is why soul designation is called the mind.
This is another very important line in this verse.
The mind puts designation upon the soul.
Oh, you are Indian, you are man, you are woman, you are bird, you are dog.
In this way, because the mind creates certain designations
and then if the mind makes you believe you are India
and Indian team wins, you think, oh yes, I won, I am victorious.
If Indian team suffers, then you cry.
So just like you are identifying yourself with a country,
you identify yourself with family.
Something happens to any family member, we come in great stress.
Sometimes people get shocked, they get paralysis also.
Why? Because of identification.
Actually there is no family.
So this is only identification.
The mind makes you believe that you are this machine
and connected machines, they belong to me.
Similarly, if money is lost, people get shocked.
Oh my God, money is lost because you think it is your money.
So you are this body and this machine, this body,
which is producing so many, you think that money belongs to you.
So you get shocked when you lose the money.
So all the problems are simply because of this mind.
Mind creates designations and then mind tells, oh, you are this body.
So when the body is having disease, I suffer from that disease.
So it is not because of the transformations of the body.
That is when Bhagavad, it is such a nice, every shloka is so powerful.
We'll see many more such shlokas.
So after a few chapters, Lord Krishna tells another thing
that the changes of this world, they happen because of material nature.
So definitely when something has changed in the body,
when the body has got some disease,
but then thinking this disease is cause of my distress is illusion.
It is wrong.
So Lord Krishna tells the changes happen because of material nature.
Body will grow old, body will get diseases.
People around us will die.
They will take birth.
We will take wealth.
We will lose wealth.
We will have fame.
We will lose fame.
All these things happen under the control of material nature.
But happiness and distress happens because of the living entity.
It is because of us.
We don't choose to train our mind and the mind uncontrolled mind.
It always keeps us keeps us under some designation.
Very simple example.
We think I am Indian.
Indian team wins.
I am happy.
Indian team loses.
I am sad.
Sometimes we break television.
Also, some people get heart attack also in World Cup finals.
So just see so much strong identification is there.
So that is why there is no cause of lamentation.
Nothing belongs to us.
That is why one of the quality of the yogi is non possessiveness.
I don't possess anything.
This body is also not mine.
The people are not mine.
The place is not mine.
The nation, the planet, nothing belongs to me.
I am identifying myself with this place because of this uncontrolled and trained mind.
This is the cause of all distress of the living entity.
So just see how wonderful, fantastic these shlokas are.
The source designation, the mind, the designation.
The mind is the cause of all tribulations in the material world.
All tribulations are because of mind.
As long as this fact is unknown to the condition living entity, which factually most of the people do not know,
they will not pick up and read the scriptures.
So as long as we do not know that this mind is the cause of distress, what will happen?
It will wander within this universe in different positions, will keep on accepting more miserable bodies.
Today in the morning, we were taking walk together.
One more devotee was there and we saw some sparrows were enjoying nicely in their family or social circle, whatever they have.
And then suddenly a dog came, pounced upon one of their sparrows and took it to one corner to get killed.
And other sparrows are shouting, crying.
But then poor sparrow is captured by the dog.
So other species are much more horrible.
Any moment that can happen.
So if we do not know that this mind is cause of all the tribulations,
I try to fix the external things or let me have a few good marks.
Let me have a little more money.
Let me have some wonderful people around me.
Let me have a secure house and place and bank balance.
If we think by this, I'll become happy.
This will not become happy.
We'll keep on transmigrating to different species.
And then what happens?
Because the mind is affected by then when the mind is when we are ignorant of this position of mind,
mind is affected by disease, lamentation, illusion, attachment, greed, enmity.
It creates bondage and false sense of intimacy with this material world.
So that is why it is very, very important to control the mind.
And is it a cakewalk to control the mind?
Is it some tonic I can go and purchase in some shop and thus I will be able to control the mind?
No, it is not so easy.
It is very, very difficult.
That is what here.
Arjuna is telling.
Arjuna said,
O Madhusudana, the system of yoga which you have summarized appears impractical and unendurable to me for the mind is restless and unsteady.
So Krishna is telling you should not see anything, should not talk, should not do anything, should not walk.
And pull the mind inside and stare at the tip of the nose and keep mind focus on the super soul within the heart
and go to a secluded place and all these things.
So Arjuna tells it is impractical for me.
It is unendurable to me for the mind is restless and unsteady.
Chanchalam for the mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, O Krishna.
And to subdue it seems to me more difficult than controlling the wind.
Subduing the mind, I think just like a strong wind, hurricane is there.
Can you stop it by any means?
No, it is not possible.
In a similar fashion, like a strong wind, mind is difficult to control.
So mind is restless, mind is turbulent, obstinate and it is very strong.
And to subdue it, I cannot and just imagine what is the position of Arjuna.
His mind and senses were so much under control 5000 years ago when situations were very, very peaceful.
There is no working hard in office every moment getting late.
There is no rigorous competition in the education system where there is so much anxiety for the weekly exams.
There is not so much loud traffic and all such noises outside.
It was very, very peaceful.
There was no coeducation system.
Gurukul, completely he can control his senses very, very nicely.
But Arjuna is expressing 5000 years ago when people were very peaceful, much more peaceful.
That mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate, very strong and I cannot subdue it.
This method is very tough.
So controlling mind needs some process and that process itself is sort of Arjuna is rejecting.
So just imagine just to control the mind, people who take so much of hardship,
they would go to the jungle for thousands of years, keep on sitting just to control the mind.
So Arjuna is telling, no Krishna, not possible.
I won't be able to do so.
So what does Lord Krishna recommend when Arjuna expresses such inability?
Lord Krishna told,
Sri Bhagwanubhacha, the blessed Lord said,
So Sri Upadhyayi explains,
that by practice and detachment it is possible.
So Lord Krishna has accepted.
Lord Krishna is not telling if somebody is telling
that mind is your friend, mind can be controlled easily, then that is not fact.
Because the manufacturer of mind, Lord Krishna himself is telling,
it is fact.
Oh, mightily armed one.
Arjuna is called mighty armed.
He is very, very strong.
So you are very strong Arjuna, but you are right that you cannot control the mind,
which is much more stronger.
Undoubtedly, it is very difficult to curb the restless mind.
But Lord Krishna is telling it is not impossible, it is possible.
And how it is possible?
So Lord Krishna is suggesting two ways.
It is possible by one, constant practice.
And second, detachment.
So please note every word very, very carefully.
So not just practice, the word which is used here is constant practice.
We have to practice constantly and we have to have detachment also.
So what is this detachment?
Srila Prabhupada gives a very striking example from the real world.
So Prabhupada asked the disciples, do you know how they tame the lion?
Lion is such a mighty animal, ferocious animal, can kill immediately.
And when ringmaster is there, the lion is dancing on the tunes.
So how do they control the lion?
The lion is put in the cage.
And then the lion is kept starving for a long time.
And when the lion is starving, it becomes very, very weak, cannot even stand properly.
So the ringmaster goes inside and now he has a whip in his hand.
And with that whip, he beats the lion and the lion is very much scared.
Oh, my God, this man will come now.
And then he is given a little food also by the ringmaster.
So then he thinks, oh, this man is my God.
If he wants, he can kill me.
He can beat me or he can feed me.
I can survive.
I am dependent completely upon him.
So in this way, by starving the lion, such a mighty animal is also brought under control.
So that is why where are you?
Where are you?
Or enunciation is very, very important for controlling the mind.
So that is why we have got four regulated principles.
No meat eating, no intoxication, no gambling, no illicit sex.
So these things are very, very important to follow.
This is called this.
The beginning of that.
And we all are very fond of immediately fulfilling the desires of the senses.
So anything is there.
Food is already there in our home.
We can have it.
But then I want many, many varieties.
So that is why all these restaurants are thriving now.
So these restaurants were very, very important for controlling the mind.
So that is why all these restaurants are thriving now.
So these restaurants were unheard of.
That is when a very surprising thing is mentioned in the Vedas, which was surprising at that time.
He's telling you know what will happen in Kali Yuga.
In Kali Yuga, food will be sold on the streets.
So it is very shocking thing.
Food will be sold.
It is just like somebody told you that air would be sold.
You know, after 20 years, you have to purchase air.
And my God, we have to purchase air.
So it was like that.
Nobody would can imagine just like water we are purchasing now.
Purchasing water also was unimaginable.
Water is available everywhere.
Portable water.
Who would pay for water?
And similarly, food was available in the house and everywhere in temples.
There is no concept of food being sold in the shops, restaurants.
But that is mentioned in Kali Yuga.
This is going to happen.
And that is also causing great calamity, making the mind more loose and implicated, such things.
And there is food available in the shop.
There food available in packets.
We are very fond of keeping, you know, you open anybody's cupboard, you'll find some biscuits, some sweets and all these things.
Even devotees are fond of it.
So you should not do it.
Don't keep anything.
Just eat freshly cooked food.
And then at fixed time you take, don't keep this backup and all like that.
This is called control of tongue.
Otherwise, whenever my tongue wants, I have some biscuits in my this thing I will take out and eat.
So this is not a very good idea.
I'm keeping something whenever I wish I would eat.
This is not controlling the senses.
So that is why among all the senses, which we have to control, practice detachment, the top most is the most formidable is this tongue.
So the living entity is lost in the ocean of sense objects and the senses are very, very powerful.
Among them, the most powerful, most formidable is the tongue.
So first of all, we have to control the tongue.
The secret is being revealed by the Acharyas.
If somebody can control the tongue, he can control all other senses nicely.
So how to control tongue?
Taste only Krishna prasadam.
You will read the purport.
Please do read it in this.
Prabhupada is mentioning what practice we have to do the simple practice.
So take as much as prasadam as possible and then gradually come to a stage where you are eating only Krishna prasadam and nothing else apart from prasadam.
And that prasadam also should be taken not as much as you want.
Yes, initially, when you are, we cannot control your tongue.
You will anyway happen to eat outside.
So eat till neck in the beginning so that there is no temptation to eat outside.
But as we advance, we should try to have regulated prasadam at regulated times.
Also, Prabhupada mentions not that now I will store prasadam and eat whenever I want.
No, that is also not good.
Eat prasadam in regulated quantities at regulated times.
This is called controlling the tongue.
So controlling the tongue, taste and talking.
We are very fond of talking so much.
So just evaluate is this thing necessary for me to talk whether some spiritual advancement is coming out of it?
Then we should talk.
Otherwise, we should choose to just keep on chanting always Hare Krishna mantra.
Once you chant Hare Krishna, the spiritual advancement that you have made, nobody can steal from you that Lord Krishna is going to speak now to Arjuna.
We will see in further classes.
Lord Krishna tells there is no loss or diminution in this attempt.
Once if you have chanted Hare Krishna and there is no diminution, nobody can take away those credits.
So we should be very, very greedy or simply by taking the name of Krishna, I make permanent spiritual advancement.
I cannot retreat from that position.
So it is so nice.
Let me be greedy, have more and more spiritual credits.
And when those credits reach a certain situation, just like we have bank balance, there is spiritual realization.
So that is why waste time in such talks.
If I'm wasting time, not only I'm losing that time for chanting the names of Krishna or preaching Krishna consciousness, but I am.
Letting lose this tongue, making it more and more powerful.
The more you enjoy the senses, the more they become powerful.
So that is why one should know how to starve the senses.
You know what is starving when we awake Adashi fasting.
So after some time we may feel starved, emaciated.
So in that way we have to starve the senses.
The senses will bite.
I want this.
I want this.
Eyes will tell.
I want to see this.
Tongue will tell.
I want to taste it.
And you have to disobey.
You don't have to satisfy.
Starve the senses.
When you starve the senses, then the senses will come under control.
The more you feed the senses, the more loose they become, the more formidable they become, the more difficult it is to control them.
That is why Lord Krishna tells Tasmad Indriyani Adao.
In the beginning you control.
So Chanakya Pandit says enemy, fire and senses you should control in the beginning.
In the beginning, if you neglected your enemy, you neglect fire.
It will bring down your entire house building.
You cannot stop it later.
Fire.
It destroys entire village or anything, entire jungle.
But in the beginning, when it is a spark, you can control.
Similarly, senses, it can destroy a person completely.
And we see so many things how they happen.
Great celebrities, powerful people because of not being able to control the senses.
They lose all their wealth, their position, their health and everything.
So in the beginning, senses, fire and enemy should be curved in the beginning.
So in the beginning itself, just be very, very, very strict.
You cannot be little strict with it.
Prabhupada gives another example.
If you give little, that I will tell some other time.
If you give little scope to Maya, to the senses, they will completely topple you from your seat.
So either you don't give it all, then your train will go on nicely.
If you give little scope, OK, let me do little.
Let me give little freedom.
Then finished.
Don't give even little freedom.
Shukde Goswami tells I have heard from authorities.
One should never make friends with the mind.
Mind should always be treated like mine should be beaten with shoes.
Bhakti Sadan Maharaj says.
So there's the solution which is given in the scriptures.
So mind, just like you always keep on just icing somebody in a similar fashion.
That is a regular way.
The people were how the slaves they are being treated.
So mine should be kept just like a slave.
One should never make some time the slaves serving, serving.
They become very close and have a friendship with the master.
No, never let the mind become your friend.
Anytime mine can cheat, always keep the mind in the position of a slave.
Always keep on just icing, just icing.
If the mind tells you to do this thing, you tell now I will not do it.
Do it after some time just so that you can just eyes the mind.
So keep on neglecting.
So this is one solution by which we can control the mind.
Try to turn away the suggestions of the mind.
Don't listen to the mind.
So in this way, mind can be brought under control.
That is called Varage, renunciation.
And another thing is called practice, which practice Lord Krishna is talking here.
So the solution is also given by Jadabharat Maharaj.
Very simple solution, which we all can apply in our life.
This uncontrolled mind is the greatest enemy of the living entity.
If one neglects it or gives it a chance, it will grow more and more powerful
and become victorious.
If one neglects it or gives it a chance, little chance I've given to my mind,
it will grow more and more powerful and it will become victorious.
So the spiritual life is declaration of war.
War against whom? Entire material energy.
And the most important formidable enemy when we declare this war will be our mind.
This mind becomes enemy of a spiritualist.
So first of all, a person has to control this enemy.
It has to weaken this enemy.
So once he has controlled the mind, then the battle is already won.
This mind is the leader of Maya's forces.
So that is why many times spiritual life, the similes given is that of a war.
So here in the same spirit, Jadabharat is telling to Rahugan,
this uncontrolled mind is enemy in a war.
There is enemy and there are many, many enemies.
But there is one enemy who is greatest.
So this uncontrolled mind is the greatest enemy of the living entity.
We have to defeat many, many enemies, but uncontrolled mind is greatest.
If one neglects it or gives it a chance, now the greatest enemy one cannot neglect.
One cannot give chance.
It will grow more and more powerful and will become victorious.
You lose the battle.
Although it is not factual, it is very strong.
Mind is not a person, but it behaves like a person, very strong.
It tries to control you.
It covers the constitutional position of the soul.
Now the solution is given.
O King, please try to conquer this mind by
Guru Harish Charanopasanastro
Jahi Vyalikam Swayamatma Mosham
by the weapon of astraha, means weapon,
Charanopasana
Guru Harish Charanopasana
Please try to conquer this mind by the weapon of service to the lotus feet of the spiritual master
and of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Do this with great care.
So this is very important.
So first thing is neglect, upeksha, keep on neglecting.
Whatever mind suggests, we have to practice it.
Sometimes we think, let me simply chant Hare Krishna and Monday automatically mind will come under control.
So you have to control it.
You have to put endeavor.
Automatically can happen after millions of lives,
but you have to put positive endeavor.
You have to practice in this direction.
And then you chant Hare Krishna,
beg Krishna's blessings, engage in his seva.
And then Krishna will bless us to control the mind.
So we have to put endeavor automatically.
It is not going to happen.
So that is why we are chanting.
But we never practice to control the mind.
We never practiced attentive,
offenseless chanting.
Then our chanting also will stop.
Offenses will increase. Pride will increase.
All other weeds will increase in the heart.
So we have to practice.
So if we are not practiced 10 years, 20 years, 30, 40, 50 years,
we can keep on doing sadhana.
We can be very particular.
Some devotees are very, very particular in sadhana.
100 out of 100 percent.
But much advancement is not there
because they did not practice control of the mind.
They are finishing their 16 rounds early in the morning.
Brahmurta continuously to our chanting finish.
And every day they are there for sadhana.
But because they are not able to hear attentively,
they are not able to control the mind,
hear each and every word, meditate upon the meaning.
This practice did not happen.
So that is why much advancement is not shown.
The situation remains almost the same.
So we have to practice.
Without practice, that is why Krishna is also telling here.
Krishna is not telling, yes, Arjuna,
automatically it will happen.
Krishna is telling, no, abhyasa.
Abhyasa means practice.
The same word is being used in 12 chapters also.
First of all, Krishna tells always,
always keep on thinking about me, remain absorbed in me.
But if this is not possible,
you practice.
So this practice is important.
Just like we practice, we train our muscles
and then we become heavy lifters.
In a similar fashion, we have to train upeksha,
rejecting the suggestions of mind.
Then we can reject strong suggestions
of doing illicit sex, of other unwarranted desires.
Otherwise, if we are not practiced,
we allow the suggestions of mind,
we cannot control other strong forces
which arise in the body.
So there is one solution,
upeksha practice, neglect, saying no.
So try to say many times no to the mind.
Either don't do it or do it later.
What the mind is suggesting, if that is important,
try to turn down the suggestions
and try to chart.
That is why discipline.
Discipline your day very, very nicely.
This sadhana bhakti is one kind of disciplining.
This time is dedicated for this activity.
I will not do anything else.
So this sadhana, tapasya,
it helps us to regulate the mind.
I will not eat anything on Ekadashi.
Mind will tell eat, eat. What is the harm? No, eat, no.
You tell no, I will not take anything.
This is called taming the mind, upeksha,
neglecting the mind.
So there is one solution.
Second solution is dama.
Dama means control the senses.
When you starve the senses,
control the senses, dama, shama.
Shama means mind control.
So shama will automatically follow dama.
You control the senses, you starve the senses
and then automatically mind also
will come under control.
And starving senses begins with starving of tongue.
And we don't have to starve fortunately
because we are in Krishna consciousness.
Ashtanga yogi has to starve.
We simply have to engage in positive activity.
So much urge is there to talk, talk about Krishna,
preach Krishna consciousness,
talk the names of Krishna,
chant the names of Krishna.
And there is urge to eat, offer to Krishna
and then you honor that prasadam.
So in this way the tongue
can be brought under control.
The starvation, material starvation
automatically happens.
So practice this upeksha,
starvation of senses
and the third thing which is most powerful,
which is described in Bhagavad Gita,
which is described here also is
So guru hares charan upasana.
We have to worship
the lotus feet of two personalities,
guru and hari.
This is very important.
So a person who has
learned this art of worshipping
guru and Krishna both,
guru hares charan upasana
astraha, this is a weapon
by which you can kill your strongest
enemy in this war,
this uncontrolled mind.
Jahi, jahi means you declare victory,
you defeat this greatest enemy by
worshipping the lotus
feet of guru and hari.
So worshipping the lotus feet means
literal worship also, deity worship
that we do, one day guru shri charan
Aravindam, every day we do in the morning
guru puja and
more importantly it means along
with that, carrying out their instructions.
So Krishna has given
these instructions in the Bhagavad Gita.
Spiritual master tells some instructions
to serve Krishna.
So if you follow those instructions,
simply if you follow, this is very easy method.
We have to understand the
intention, the direction of guru
and simply carry out the orders of guru.
Guru tells you mop the floor,
mop the floor very very nicely.
Guru tells you eat this, you eat that thing only.
Guru tells don't eat that, you don't eat that.
Guru tells go there, you go there.
Guru tells stop, you stop there.
Simply by following the instructions of guru
as it is, that is also called charanopasana
as per the scriptures.
So very strictly following the
guidance of guru, very simple,
automatically entire mind will come under
control. So just
discover through the
devotees who are implementing the guru's
instructions very nicely.
Implement those instructions and worship
Krishna as per those instructions.
Always keep the lotus feet of Krishna
in the heart.
And somehow or the other,
...
So by following the
instructions of guru and Krishna, the most important
instruction, the crux of all
instruction is always remember
Krishna and never forget Krishna.
...
There is the instruction of guru and Krishna.
So somehow or the other, it is mentioned,
...
If we are
always able to fix our mind in the lotus
feet of Krishna, then automatically
mind will come under control
because mind is looking for this thing only
lotus feet of Krishna and we do not know that.
So by little practice, initially
mind will not like
but then you focus the mind on the lotus
feet and then gradually you will see
when the lotus feet are impressed in the mind,
automatically mind becomes very very
pacified and all the senses also are
controlled very very easily.
So definitely it is formidable
but it is possible by constant practice
and detachment.
Detachment is starving the senses,
detachment is ... neglecting the instructions
of mind, practice is
worshipping the lotus feet of guru
and Krishna, strictly following their
instructions and always
keep the lotus feet of Krishna within
the heart. Then Krishna controls our mind.
But we have to practice it.
And what is the proof? The proof is
the great example of all the
devotees who are following now Krishna consciousness.
So all of us were having loose
senses but by
Hare Guru Charanopasana Astraha
the devotees have been able to
have a very simple life
and restrained life. So the proof
is there. The proof is there of Parishit Maharaj
who got disturbed simply because
one sage did not offer him respect. He was
disturbed by hunger and thirst
in the jungle. But when we started hearing
Bhagavatam worshipping the lotus feet
of Shukadeva Goswami, he was
without any disturbance
he was sitting there for a week without
drinking, without eating, without moving.
So he got complete victory
over all such disturbances.
The proof is the prostitute
and the prostitute started
chanting 24 hours, started
living in a cottage, immediately
developed complete control over the senses
by worshipping the lotus feet of
Guru and Hari. So there's a time
tested method but we have
to practice by practicing detachment
renunciation. Then it will
be possible. So with this we will end.
