So, Lord Krishna is slowly, gradually, step-by-step taking Arjuna to the perfection of yoga system.
What is the necessity of all this explanation that has been mentioned in Bhagavad Gita?
People are telling, okay, let us read later, let us do our current duties or studies or whatever we are doing now.
So, a person who is wise, he can see what is the need of this philosophy and to whom this philosophy is being spoken.
Oh, Bhagavad Gita, no, no, it is meant for those who are not successful in their life, like that.
But if we see Bhagavad Gita here is being spoken, you are seeing in the picture, to Arjuna, what is the situation of Arjuna?
He has taken birth as the Prince of Hastinapur.
From Hastinapur, the kings were ruling the entire world, not just this country.
And there is a description, which is in Mahabharata, Shrimad Bhagavatam, other places,
about how all the other countries, they were being ruled by the Pandavas and Pandavas went to different countries.
Some went toward north in the European countries, some went towards the Middle East, and thus they were ruling everywhere.
They defeated all those kings or subjugated them.
So Arjuna was born in such a family and he was the most valiant among all the warriors.
He was such an extraordinary general fighter that he was able to defeat all the denizens of heavenly planets also single handedly.
And even defeated Lord Shiva in a battle, and thus he got pleased and received a special weapon from him.
So he was so very much advanced in his skills.
One of the most advanced fighters of his time, he could defeat people of higher planets also.
And he was very, very handsome also, having very good looks.
And he was very much learned also, very sharp, moralist also.
So people think, okay, yes, morality is very good because a moral person can be happy.
But here morality also has failed Arjuna.
Arjuna was so moral of such elevated character that when he went to Indra,
there was some arrangement why he had to leave this planet and he went there.
And there he, Indra thought that Arjuna has a desire to enjoy one of the Apsaras.
Apsaras are the society girls which dance and please the king of heaven.
So he told immediately, indicated that you please go and satisfy Arjuna, who was actually his son, Indra's son.
And the Apsara went and Arjuna immediately denied, oh, no, no, you are like my mother.
And how can it is not possible?
I cannot ever think of this thing.
So he was cursed to become eunuch.
And then Arjuna, the great fighter, was teaching dance to the daughter of the king of Viratnagar.
And then many got to know Arjuna is this person in the guise of some ordinary dancer.
So he told you, please marry my, accept the hand of my daughter.
So he told, no, I'm teaching her.
So the relationship between teacher and student is like father and daughter.
So she's like my daughter.
So what are you talking?
I can never do that.
But yes, because she's my daughter, I can accept her hand for my son.
And in this way, she was accepted as daughter-in-law.
But Arjuna was just imagined a person of such character who I've taught her.
She's my student.
She's like my daughter.
Oh, my father enjoys with that woman.
She's like my mother.
But even such what to speak of material abilities.
Some people do have material abilities, but they end up being immoral.
And they are thus they are implicated and by the laws of the state or by laws of nature karma.
And thus they suffer.
So if a person is sinful, the Vedas are telling there is no possibility of happiness,
even though by destiny, he may be very, very opulent.
So these people do not know there are many things, many fine laws of nature,
which if you break, just like now, if you break the laws of hygiene, we get diseased.
If you break those laws, we are bound to suffer.
Does not matter even if you are having some opulence by your past destiny.
But now if you are sinful, you have to suffer in future is there is much more suffering
because since take some time to fructify.
But nevertheless, in this life also, there would always be disturbance
and the sin begins from as simple as telling lies.
If a person is telling lies, then also mental disturbance is sure to come.
That is also sin.
So Arjuna, not just he was very smart, very, very powerful and supremely wealthy.
Arjuna was able to discover a mountain of gold.
That is why he's also called Dhananjaya, a person who could get so much of money.
But even though he's so much wealthy, he could get a mountain of gold.
We are yearning for some salary, some profit.
We want some power.
Arjuna was so powerful.
He was having weapons which could have destroyed the universe, not just planet.
And he was very, very sharp moralist.
But still he came in distress.
This is the nature of material world.
How much ever successful you can become, the material nature will somehow or the other
put us into suffering.
So a person who is wise, he understands the background of Bhagavad Gita.
A person like Arjuna can suffer.
Then what to speak of me?
I'm not even point one percent qualified as him.
So when Arjuna, after attaining all the material success, still when he was dissatisfied,
then he asked Krishna that I am surrendering to you.
I am surrendered.
And please take me not as your friend, although we are friends, but now I offer myself as
your student.
So unless there is offering a student, unless there is surrender, there is no flow of knowledge.
So many devotees, you know, many people, they come to meet and they keep on talking, talking
and talking.
But there is no offering.
There is never inquisitiveness.
So they come, they meet and they go away and just wasting the time.
So unless there is surrender, there is no question of flow of knowledge.
So when Arjuna also was debating with Krishna, Krishna did not instruct Arjuna.
Yes, questions are encouraged, but in a spirit of surrender.
So when Arjuna put forth questions in a spirit of surrender, after surrendering, he was inquiring.
Then Krishna chastised first of all, you are giving much amazing logic.
But ultimately you are crying for something which is not worthy of crying.
And what is that thing?
That is this body.
No sane man cries for the body.
Because this body is just like a dress, we don't cry when we change our dresses.
In a similar fashion, a person who is in knowledge, he doesn't cry for change of dresses or the
situation of this dress.
So anybody who cries a lot for the dress is called Shudra.
The Shudra means they cry for small things.
And Shudra also means untrained in the Vedic knowledge.
So those people who cry for small things, they cannot understand Veda.
So they were not given training also.
But somehow by proper association, he can come out of this crying, come to the platform
of sanity, then there is question of any transfer of knowledge.
So in this situation, when Arjuna offered himself to Krishna, that Krishna, all my things
have failed, whatever I have attained in my life, now please tell me what to do.
So Krishna told him, first of all, don't worry about this body.
Because you are not the body.
A wise man, this body is continuously changing.
There is one more change is going to happen at the time of death.
A person who is wise, he knows that I am simply moving to another body.
And a person who does not know Shudra, who is not trained, cannot realize such a person
will cry.
Now we see the entire world is crying simply on the bodily platform.
Bodily losses are taken as very serious loss, and bodily happiness is taken as great matter
of jubilation.
This is ignorance, complete ignorance.
Stress of mind is taken as distress, peacefulness of mind is taken as happiness.
This is also ignorance.
We are not the body and we are not the mind.
And then Krishna explained to Arjuna, thus please understand, first of all, you have
to be sane.
Why you are crying?
Because you are having too much attachment on this bodily platform.
Because we are dissatisfied.
Why we are dissatisfied?
Because we have forgotten our relationship with God as we discussed in the last class.
And if you forget the person whom you love, you will be dissatisfied.
We all want love in life.
You've lost your memory.
And even though your loved ones are standing in front of you, you don't feel pleasure seeing
them.
And that's because there is no love, no pleasure in life.
You will seek pleasure here and there, somewhere we want pleasure.
So that is why he told Arjuna to understand knowledge.
It is very important, first of all, to come to the level of renunciation.
If you are too much attached to this world, you will never come to platform of knowledge.
This lamentation will not be solved.
So renunciation, sannyas was explained by Krishna to Arjuna.
And before sannyas, it is not possible to understand the importance of sannyas and renunciation
also.
So that is why you begin by giving up the results of your activity.
If a person, unlimitedly, unrestrictedly, just like child is playing morning to evening
computer game, he cannot have any sanity about his academics, about his future.
So that is where regulation is given.
You do this much study, then you can play this much.
In this way, he is studying also, which is the actual aim for which the parents are raising
the child.
But nevertheless, he has some inclination.
So let him do study when he studies nicely, then allow him to play also a little.
In this manner, the Vedas recommend the way of enjoying in this world, that ultimately
they want to make a person connected to God, but the person is not interested.
Okay, you do this activity for God and then you will get this material result in which
your real interest lies.
We are not interested in God, but we serve God so that we can have material enjoyment
in life.
So this is called karma kanda portion.
So when a person starts following this and then he goes on to karma yoga, starts giving
up the result of his activity.
So Vedas also recommend do some charity.
So in future you will be rich and this thing will happen.
When a person develops the habit of giving up, not enjoying everything that he has, when
a person starts giving up the actions of his, the results of his actions, then some sanity
comes to him.
He comes out of this material intoxication.
It has reduced so he can have some thoughtfulness.
So any person can see this thing, how Bhagavad Gita is so important, who can be successful
than Arjuna.
And he is also lamenting.
So it is very imperative for everyone to understand.
So in order to bring a person to the sanity, start renouncing the results of your activities.
Give up.
Don't enjoy everything.
Karma yoga begins from there.
And then further sannyas, when a person is realized that he is not the body by such practice,
by reading the Vedas, when the intelligence is clear, he can understand the Vedas.
And when he has understood the Vedas, the first principle of the Vedas perfectly, that
I am not the body, satisfaction of the body is not my satisfaction.
This is called Jnana yoga.
So a Jnana yogi is not supposed to do the duties.
So Jnana yogi leaves the duties and then he takes sannyas.
And after sannyas comes this level that is called Sankhya yoga.
So this Sankhya yoga word, sometimes you will find it being synonymous with Ashtanga yoga.
As in this chapter, although the name is Sankhya yoga, but the details of Ashtanga yoga are
mentioned.
And sometimes Sankhya yoga, you also find synonymous with Jnana yoga.
So what is this Sankhya yoga?
And this Sankhya yoga, already we have done in the second chapter.
And then again, this is Sankhya yoga here.
So how do we understand this thing?
So Srila Prabhupada very beautifully explains, Sankhya means Samyakhyati, Samyak means complete
description.
And Sankhya has come from the word count also.
So to count also means to Sankhya or to analyze.
Just like when we sit and we analyze the business, profit, loss, expenditure, turnover, we count
in various verticals.
So counting the things or analysis is called Sankhya yoga, it's called Sankhya.
So everybody is following Sankhya process.
Even the modern material scientists, they also analyze the world.
This is chemical energy, this is electrical energy, this is sodium, this is potassium,
this is electron, this is proton.
In this way, this is protein, this is nucleus and in this way, they are trying to analyze
the world in different components by counting the components.
So this analysis, the literal translation of analysis is called Sankhya.
So everybody is following the process of Sankhya.
It could be the material scientist or it could be the followers of Vedic Sankhya system.
But what is the difference when we read Sankhya, we are understanding the analysis directly
given by the God because our analysis is imperfect.
Sometimes which is good for us, we tell it is harmful.
And things which are harmful for us, we tell that it is good and we mistake.
Because this analysis based on our reasoning and logic, which we have understood in all
our sessions, it is imperfect.
So when we take the analysis of the world very, very nicely from God himself, that is
called Sankhya yoga.
That means which connects us to God.
So in the second chapter, the Sankhya yoga, which is mentioned, that Sankhya yoga is different
from what we are going to read now.
And the similar Sankhya yoga is also mentioned.
Originally, the Sankhya yoga philosophy was mentioned by Kapil Dev to his mother Devahuti.
Who is Devahuti?
Who is Kapil Dev?
Devahuti is the daughter of Manu.
Who is Manu?
Manu is the first person from whom all the Manavas, human beings have descended.
Manu is the son of Brahma.
And then Manu created other human beings.
Thus we are called Manav.
Just like Pandavas, why they are called Pandav?
They are descendants of Pandu.
So we are called Manav because we are descendant of Manu.
So Manu is our forefather.
His daughter was Devahuti.
Devahuti was married to very great powerful sage Kardamuni.
And their son was Kapil Dev.
They came in Satyug, long time ago.
And Kapil Dev explained the system of Sankhya yoga.
It is mentioned in 3rd canto of Bhagavatam to his mother Devahuti.
And what is this Sankhya yoga, the system?
It is a combination.
When a person has come to the level of Jnana, understanding that I am not the body, then
he further analyzes and he tries to find the root cause of this world.
I am not the body, so from where I have come, from where this body has come, how these things
are functioning.
So analyzing like this by understanding the material nature very nicely and then trying
to connect to that supreme source, the super soul in the heart.
This is called Sankhya yoga, a combination of knowledge and mystic yoga.
And when a person understands firmly that yes, super soul is there, present in my heart
and he wants to establish a connection with him, then he moves on to the next level.
He becomes Dhyani yogi.
And after that Dhyana, when he is established in constant meditation upon Krishna within
the heart, then he develops spontaneous attraction for God.
And then he starts engaging himself in service of God, that is called Bhakti yoga.
So this is the slow process in which a living entity moves.
So however, in the second chapter, the Sankhya yoga, which is mentioned, it has got nothing
to do with the Sankhya yoga, which we just discussed, which is mentioned in this chapter,
which was explained by Kapil Muni to Devahuti.
That Sankhya yoga is a combination of knowledge, analyzing the material ingredients and mystic
yoga.
But the Sankhya yoga mentioned in the second chapter means analysis of how I am not the
body.
This is also analysis.
We see Lord Krishna is beautifully analyzing that Dehino Asminyatha Dehe Komaram Yauvanam
Jara, Matras Parashas Tu Kaunteya, Si Toshana Shuk Dukhda, that please understand this happiness
and distress which is troubling you so much.
What is this happiness and distress?
Matras Parashas Tu Kaunteya, it is simply contact of senses with the sense object that
is taken as happiness.
But you are not these senses, you are different from the senses.
So why you are getting disturbed?
You are different from these senses, either you satisfy or you dissatisfied the senses.
You are not affected by this.
So you should realize your identity.
As I've explained before, if a person is having paralysis, whether it is hot or it is cold,
he will not be affected at all.
So please understand it is an illusion.
We wanted to have an illusory independent existence.
So that is why this machine has been given to us.
And there are some electrical pulses which carry the touch sensations of the body to
my brain.
Suppose the same pulses, those neurons, they start coming from your skin and they are connected
to my brain.
Somebody touches your body, I'll get the signals.
So please do not think that you are this body.
Dehino Asminyatha Dehe, you are seeing that this body is changing completely.
Everything in the body is changing.
You take air and you breathe out.
The air is continuously changing, but you remain the same, even though so many times
different set of air molecules have gone and they have come out.
So you are not the air within the body.
So who are you?
Blood, blood transfusion happens.
You are not the blood.
Also, are you the bones?
Bones also can be replaced.
So you are not the bones also organs.
In this way, we have discussed many times before in this way by analysis, a person tries
to understand who he is.
So this is also analysis, although not analysis, what Sankhya mentions as a division of world
into 24 or 26 elements, Bhoomi Rapa Nalovayu, Kammano Buddhi Revacha, Earth, Air, Water,
Fire, Sky, Mind, Intelligence, False Ego, then five working sense objects, five knowledge
acquiring sense objects.
So all these things are different in the second chapter.
So analysis is given how you are different from the body.
So because this analysis is present in second chapter, the knowledge in second chapter is
also called Sankhya Yoga.
And because that is connecting us to Krishna, to God, it is called yoga.
That is analysis and that connects us to God.
So that is why that is also called Sankhya Yoga.
However, this Sankhya Yoga is different what we are trying to study, which Lord Krishna
mentions here in this chapter.
So Sankhya, one more understanding of Sankhya is there.
So I hope I have not confused you, it is clear till here.
One more understanding of Sankhya you'll find in the Shat Darshan.
So what is this Sankhya philosophy?
So in order to understand truth, understanding of truth is important when a person attains
everything in life, still he is dissatisfied, then he goes to next level of inquiry.
What is truth?
Why am I dissatisfied?
So in order to understand the truth, which is explained in the Vedas, different interpretations
have come out from the Vedic philosophies.
That is called Shat Darshan or the six philosophies, Vaisheshika, Nyaya, Yoga and Mimamsa, Vedanta.
So these are the philosophies.
So one philosophy tells Vaisheshika philosophy.
So they have read the Vedas only very very nicely, but by reading the Vedas, they could
not understand in disciplic succession.
So they came to think, oh this world is made up of atoms ultimately.
So absolute truth is described as Brahm in the Vedas, in the Vedanta.
So this Brahm is understood to be some people by atom because it is told Brahm is eternal,
Brahm is not created, not destroyed.
So atom is not created, atom is a fundamental particle and we do not know what modern science
called atom is actually atom or not.
But the Vedas tell yes, actually when the entire body is disintegrated, then still this
body continues to exist in the form of small particles which are indivisible.
That is called Anu.
And a person however with naked eyes cannot perceive this fact.
And you'd be surprised to know this thing is also mentioned in the third canto of Bhagavatam
only.
5000 years ago, atomic theory has come recently, few decades ago.
But 5000 years ago, sages in the jungle without microscope, telescope, any analysis, they
are explaining that this body is made up of small indivisible particles called Anu atoms.
And even after the body is disintegrated, those particles continue to exist.
And as we have discussed in our Jigyasa session, incredible Vedas, how all these scientists,
they have gone through our Vedas, Puranas and thus they are trying to like Erwin Schrodinger,
Niels Bohr, Nikola Tesla, all of them were reading.
And they also give some interpretation of what the Vedas are telling.
So this is one understanding.
So they have come to know absolute truth, Brahma means the atoms, actually, the world
is made up of combination of atoms.
Another philosophy is that of Karma Mimamsa philosophy.
That philosophy tells that the world is eternal.
And there are laws, which is absolute truth.
The absolute truth is not something spiritual beyond this world, but this world itself and
it is governed by the laws about God or some supreme controlling authority.
We are not bothered because even if there is God, God is bound to give you the results
as per your activities because the Vedas mentioned so many laws of nature.
So they tell we need not bother about God, even if he is there or not there, he is bound
to give you results as per your activities.
So better do nice activities.
And nice activities will lead you to platform of happiness or liberation.
This is called Karma Mimamsa philosophy, taking the laws of nature as absolute truth,
then there is yoga philosophy given by the sage expounded by the sage Patanjali.
We have all heard or would have heard of Patanjali yoga sutras.
So the sage Patanjali tells no, no, absolute truth is actually a person, supreme person,
and he is there in the heart and the system of yoga.
It tells us how to perceive the presence of that absolute truth, supreme Lord within our
heart.
So this Ashtanga yoga is another way of another.
They also have some understanding, but not perfect understanding.
She explains, even though they are advanced and they understand absolute truth is a person
from a person, all these things are coming out, all the universes, but still they don't
want to engage in any relationship with that person, engage in service of that person,
but they want to merge in the body of that person because of separate existence.
There is so much of trouble.
So let me merge myself now.
So even though they understand that supreme personality as per matma is present in my
heart, but they don't want to so per matma, they want to merge to this ultimate objective
of the Ashtanga yogis.
They want to go and merge in the body.
So like this, six philosophies are there mentioning the Vedas.
So some of these people also tell that I am following Sankhya philosophy.
So what is that Sankhya philosophy Sankhya philosophy?
This is little atheistic philosophy.
Atheistic means although they explain the Vedas and read Vedas and Vedanta, but they
don't accept the personality of God and Sankhya philosophy tells everything is temporary.
Everything is not temporary.
Everything is illusion.
Sankhya philosophy tells just like in a dream, you are imagining a world that there is water,
there is tree, there is mountain, there are people.
Similarly, now this is also a dream which is going on around you.
So what is a perfect philosophy, Vedanta philosophy expounded by Ved Vyas and confirmed by Lord
Krishna.
Krishna is mentioning here, these are my different energies, eight kinds of different energies.
If it is illusion only, why Krishna will take trouble to explain?
This is earth, air, water, fire, sky, mind, intelligence.
These are my energies.
Krishna is real.
So his energies are also real.
However, some people are not able to understand and they tell actually just like in a dream,
earth, air, water, fire, sky and all those things, it is simply your hallucination.
Similarly, now also we are hallucinating.
So when there is self-realization, you understand that you are only God.
God for them is not a person, but simply one consciousness which is spread everywhere.
I am also God, you are also God, just that we have not realized.
So stages like Ashtavakra and others, they propound this philosophy, which is not substantiated
by the Vedas.
So although this philosophy also carries the name Sankhya, it is not the Sankhya which
was mentioned by Kapil Modi.
It is wrong interpretation of that philosophy.
Another philosopher in the recent history came by the same name Kapila and he misinterpreted
the original Sankhya philosophy given by Kapil Dev.
So that these are various understandings of Sankhya.
Sankhya means analysis.
Even modern scientists who analyze the world in different components, they are also called
Sankhyaites.
Yoga also means the philosophy which is mentioned in the second chapter because analysis of
the body and soul is given and it combines us to Supreme Lord.
So it is called Yoga, Sankhya Yoga.
But what we are going to study now here, what Kapil Muni explained to Dev Huti, the original
Sankhya Yoga philosophy is after Gyan Yoga, it is a combination of knowledge as well as
mystic yoga to find out what is a root cause, the soul of this entire, just like this body
has got soul.
When the soul is out, body will not be able to sustain, it will not produce byproducts,
it vanishes, dwindles.
So what is the soul of this entire universe who is sustaining all these things, such wonderful
systems are going on.
So that is Sankhya, finding out the root of this thing.
But first of all, it is very, very important to come to this level of knowledge to have
perfect renunciation unless a person is very much attached and addicted to sense enjoyment
just like a child who is playing computer games day in and day out, where is the question
of knowledge and analysis?
So that is why Krishna has so strictly told Arjuna, we read how every second shloka Arjuna
was being told to remain indifferent, don't become happy with the pleasure of the senses,
you are not the senses, don't become distressed in the distress of the senses because you
are not the body, you are not the senses.
Yes, I think there was some problem, but now it has resumed.
So Krishna has been telling Arjuna in every other shloka, please do not indulge in the
happiness of the senses because happiness and distress is same thing, renunciation,
has been so much stressed by Krishna to come to the platform of knowledge, understanding
Sankhya and then going beyond Sankhya to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
And then Krishna also told Arjuna, please fight and do Karma Yoga.
So that is why Arjuna wants to clarify.
So Krishna, I want I should do yoga or I should take sannyas.
So yoga means I have to fight and offer the results to you and sannyas means I have to
leave my activities.
So that is why before explaining the rules and regulations of the Sankhya Yoga, Ashtanga
Yoga system, Krishna will give answer to the questions Arjuna asked in the fifth chapter.
What is yoga?
What is sannyasa?
Which is better?
So that we will see in the next class.
So for now, we will finish the session and we will practice this wonderful process of
chanting the holy names, which is even beyond the Sankhya philosophy, Sankhya means understanding
what is the root of this world.
And the root of this world is the whole world has come from the Supreme Personality or sound.
And the liberation also happens by sound.
So those people who are wise, they take to the direct process.
If a person is not able to take to the direct process, then gradually over many, many lifetimes,
they go through this yoga ladder very, very slowly.
But we are fortunate.
So let us practice this topmost form of yoga, which is called mantra yoga, which is also
bhakti yoga.
So this mantra meditation is very powerful.
So we'll take up questions and answers once we are done with this small practice.
So we have to simply focus on this holy name Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna
Hare Hare, Hare Ram Hare Ram, Ram Ram Hare Hare.
Simply chant and hear these words with great attention.
Don't think anything else exists around you.
Just focus on each and every word very, very attentively with the understanding that I
am receiving God and his energy personally.
Hare Krishna.
I am requesting God, his counterpart, Radha Krishna, please engage me in your service.
So spines can be erect.
And yes, all the questions we will take, please do not worry.
Let us just focus on this chanting now for a while.
And after that, I'll be online to take the questions.
So please keep your spine straight.
All the questions of philosophy will be answered only by this chanting, all the qualities and
realization that we are discussing.
