So Arjuna had put forth few questions as we saw in the last class.
He is expressing concern of a common man.
If I work very hard for spiritual advancement and I don't succeed, then what is going to
happen to me?
I am neither of material world nor of the spiritual world.
Then Lord Krishna replies.
What is the reply?
We will see today.
And finish off with these instructions on the 6th chapter of Bhagavad Gita.
Text number 40.
The Blessed Lord said, Son of Pritha, a transcendentalist engaged in auspicious activities, does not
meet with destruction, either in this world or in the spiritual world.
One who does good, my friend, is never overcome by evil.
We will see further translations and then we will discuss the meaning.
The unsuccessful yogi, after many, many years of enjoyment on the planets of the pious living
entities, is born into a family of righteous people or into a family of rich aristocracy.
Or he takes his birth in a family of transcendentalists who are surely great in wisdom.
Verily, such a birth is rare in this world.
On taking such a birth, he again revives the divine consciousness of his previous life
and he tries to make further progress in order to achieve complete success, O son of
Kuru.
By virtue of the divine consciousness of his previous life, he automatically becomes attracted
to the yogic principles, even without seeking them.
Such an inquisitive transcendentalist, striving for yoga, stands always above the ritualistic
principles of the scriptures.
But when the yogi engages himself with sincere endeavour in making further progress, being
washed of all contaminations, then ultimately, after many, many births of practice, he attains
the supreme goal.
A transcendentalist who is engaged in auspicious activities, means the yogic activities, does
not meet with destruction either in this world or in the spiritual world.
So what does it mean that he does not meet with destruction?
Because the soul cannot be destroyed.
So what is the meaning of the word?
So vinaash here means that a person is completely lost in the cycle of evolution.
So it is after many, many births of suffering in various species that a person gets this
valuable human form of life.
And if a person does not take the auspicious path, the path which is opening the door for
liberation, for all happiness, that is called auspicious path.
Then if a person does not take to this path of yoga practice, auspiciousness, then he
is destroyed.
Destroyed means, just like here also in this world we tell, if you throw a person out on
the street or you take away from him all his wealth, richness, assets, that means you
have destroyed that person.
You have taken his degree, you have taken away his business, taken away his job, taken
away the people from him, that means the person is destroyed practically.
He has no assets left with him.
Taking away all the assets and putting him in such a place that he can never come back
to regular life, that is called destroying a person completely.
So if we lose human form of life, spending in just animal propensities, the nature works
with artificial intelligence having some laws.
As per our activities, we get different machines to fulfill our desires.
Lord is so kind, although he has given beautiful message in the Bhagavad Gita, he does not
force.
He will always suggest that please take to it.
He will request from the good conscience.
So the conscience speaks to us, please do not do this activity.
But when we don't listen to this voice, then we'll go in such species in which that voice
of conscience will not be there.
He does not want to listen, let me not speak, let me not give him such intelligence.
So Krishna begs Bhagavatam mentions through the conscience of a living entity not to engage
in inauspicious path.
But then a person being dragged by the senses, indulges in all the activities, rejects the
voice of the heart, then he's destroyed by the laws of nature.
The laws will put him in such a situation, some other animal species, where he'll be
completely forgetful, all the assets will be taken away from him.
His wealth will be taken away, his education will be taken away.
Human body, this valuable asset will be taken away.
And then he will be sent to such a place where he's clueless, he cannot do anything.
He's lost, destroyed practically.
So this is the meaning of destruction, being lost in this material whirlpool.
Now when he's going to get next that human form that is not certain.
Raghupad gives a very vivid example of this, Raghupad tells.
If you see somebody is working very, very hard to decorate his house, morning to evening,
he is busy in that.
And day after day, he's putting all the effort in decorating the house.
Then one would be naturally inquisitive, he will go and ask that what happened?
If you are working so hard, you must expect that some occasion is there, some festival
is going to happen.
So if the person tells you, yes, I'm doing it so that I can burn it all down, until what?
You are decorating house to burn the house down?
So it is a very shocking answer.
But actually, Raghupad explains that is what all the materialists are doing in this world.
So this body is a house in which we are living.
And although we know that this body is not going to last forever, it is going to get
burned down, still a person is putting all the effort just to take care of this body.
Or the other bodies, the other houses, he may call them family member, neighbor, or
the people of same nation, we see so much agitation is happening for the nation.
But ultimately, all this agitation is for what?
All these social reformation movements are for what?
Just like this person is simply working very, very hard to decorate a house.
Similarly, all these movements, all this hard endeavor, all this education, lot of stress,
anxiety, depression, struggle, motivation, all this is for what?
Simply so that houses can be decorated.
You are decorating your house and house of your family members, nation, society like
that.
And ultimately, you only will set fire into these houses, especially that is more true
in Hindu religion.
The bodies are put into fire and everything is lost.
The name is lost, the education is lost, beauty is lost, wealth is lost, everything is lost.
Anything which is connected with the body, all the skills, everything is lost completely.
Still, it does not strike, oh yes, what I am doing, I am the dweller of this body.
And I am working very, very hard simply for taking care of the houses, not caring for
the people who are living within.
So that is why Bhagavatam mentions Janani na sasyaad, Guru na sasyaad, Bandur na sasyaad,
Nayadmo chate samupetam rityam.
You do not have right to become relative of anybody, father, mother, son, teacher.
If you cannot stop their death, do not produce a child if you cannot stop their death, then
we are illegitimate parents.
Do not accept any disciple if you cannot deliver him from the clutches of death, then we are
illegitimate teacher.
Because the student is dependent upon the teacher for knowledge.
And the same boy is dependent upon parents for knowledge, the parents are the first teachers.
And if they educate him towards the path of liberation, Krishna Consciousness, then his
life is successful, otherwise we have committed a crime, in the words of Bhagavatam, by bringing
a soul in our contact and then not giving any guidance.
So that is why Bhagavatam tells, yes, house should be maintained, but all the time should
not be spent simply in decorating the house.
How should be kept so that we can live in it comfortably, especially when that is not
your house, not permanent house.
You are there for a while, just like we go and stay in a guest house, do we decorate
the guest house?
It is very dirty.
So we went on a trip recently and the guest house was dirty.
So we cleaned it so that at least we are there for two days, we should live comfortably.
Many other things were not there, furniture was not there proper, we did not try to fix
the furniture, because anyway, that is not important for two days of stay.
So in a similar fashion, this body, these houses should be taken care just so that the
soul can continue living in this body and fulfill the real mission, that is to traverse
the path of auspiciousness, the path of yoga.
So Lord Krishna is telling, a materialist, he meets with destruction, but a spiritualist,
transcendentalist, he does not meet with destruction either in this world or in the spiritual world
where is the cause of destruction.
Why?
What does happen to him?
That Lord Krishna explains.
So first of all, he goes directly to the spiritual world, he is not destroyed at all.
If he is able to perfect his spiritual life, that is what is expected from us.
But suppose that does not happen, because as soon as we decide to advance in spiritual
life, that is like declaring war against Maya, Maya's duty is to keep all the souls here.
And then Maya will put so many allurements, all the objects of the senses will come, money
will come, fame will come, opportunity of enjoying with other sex will come.
And all these various allurements will be provided by Maya, just like the great sage
was their Vishwamitra, he was meditating very nicely.
And then suddenly Indra, because he thought he is meditating so that he can attain my position.
Just like, you know, sometimes when the children are writing the examination, so they know
they are all competing for the same ranks.
So he may deliberately tell the wrong answer to his competitor, to his friend, so that
he may get less marks.
So in a similar fashion, when anybody is advancing very nicely in the pious activities, tapasya,
Indra gets scared that he may take my post, so Indra immediately sends Apsaras from there.
So Indra sent Menaka and Vishwamitra, although he was absorbed, but the beauty was celestial,
such beauties are not observed on this planet.
The bodies are of totally different nature, it's told, on heavenly planets.
In summer season, the bodies are cold, so it is very pleasant to touch.
And in winters, they would be hot.
When we perspire, we have to use deo sprays and all such things.
But in the heavenly planet, when perspiration is there, it is very, very fragrant.
So all these wonderful features are there of heavenly bodies.
So when he saw such celestial beauty, he got captivated completely.
And then ultimately, Shakuntala was born.
And then Vishwamitra realized, after the baby was born, what I have done, why did I get
attracted?
I lost all my spiritual growth.
And then he was going out.
So that is a very famous painting, in which the Shakuntala, the small baby is being shown
and Vishwamitra is rejecting, no, I don't want to see, I want to go.
And then Vishwamitra continues.
So Prabhupada tells, just like in ordinary dealings also we speak, failure is the pillar
of success that is more so in the spiritual life.
So that is why we should never be afraid of failures.
Failures will be there.
Maya knows our weakness and Maya will test us whether this person is sincere in a spiritual
life or not.
So we have to prove our sincerity.
So sometimes we may fail, but that is why perseverance is very, very important.
We feel that should be taken as a pillar of success.
Now we recognize the mistake, we work upon it, how to improve not to repeat the same
mistake.
Again we may commit, again we have to rise and stand up.
This is very important.
So if somebody is able to persevere, continue with determination, he'll go back to spiritual
world if heart is completely pure, purified of all material desires.
If not purified, then also there is no loss.
You may think that here you have lost so much chance, Vishwamitra, he was a king, but then
he was there in the jungle and meditating for thousands of years.
So thousands of years of enjoyment he has wasted.
Is it like that?
Krishna is telling, prape punyakritam lokaan.
Just like now as per a person's ability, he can afford to live in big and expensive cities.
In a similar fashion, as per one's punya, the person is transferred to big expensive
advanced planets where material comforts, sense enjoyment is hundreds and thousands
of times more literally, it is told.
There are 14 planetary systems on every successive higher planet.
The enjoyment experience is 10 times more than that of previous planet.
So you go four levels up, then that means it is 10,000 times more enjoyment than earthly
planet.
And there are seven planets up.
So 10 to the power seven times more enjoyment than just you can imagine.
So much enjoyment is there on heavenly planets.
You go there and the diseases are very, very negligent.
And so many other things are described, you will read in Bhagavatam.
If we describe more, we will develop attraction.
Yes, I want to go there.
It is so nice place.
So very wonderfully it is described in Bhagavatam.
Lot of enjoyment is there, miseries are very less.
But why not to stay there?
Because Krishna tells you cannot stay there always.
Srinay punyam marty lokam vishanti.
So you can accumulate your punya here and then you can go up.
Once punya is finished, you have to come down here.
Indra also has to fall.
You cannot stay there always.
So it is a temporary position.
But whatever sacrifice you have done here for spiritual advancement, many, many times
greater advancement will be given for a very, very long time, shashwati samaha, many years
of enjoyment.
And the years are also different.
One year on the heavenly planets is equal to lunar planets.
That platform, if you go, it is equal to six months on earthly planet.
If you go to pitralok planets, one day there is equal to one month here.
So in a similar fashion, the higher you go, the more is this larger is your life span,
the time factor.
So you go there, live there for a very, very long time.
And then once you come here, then also you are not lost.
Then when you come back, you will be given very nice opportunity of shuchi naam shri
matam gehe.
Gehe means house, shuchi naam and shri matam.
So two kinds of births are given depending upon how much a person is advanced.
He'll be given birth in aristocratic family, rich family so that he doesn't have to work
very hard for getting two square meals in a day.
So when the material necessities are fulfilled, he can focus on spiritual advancement.
Otherwise if a person is very, very poor, it is told in the Vedas, dharidra dosha, gonda
rashi nashi, chanaki pandit says.
So this dharidra dosha, you can have various positive qualities in your kundali, in your
horoscope.
But if there is one dosha, that is dharidra dosha, you may be having other good arrangements,
but then everything is destroyed by this dharidra dosha.
If a person is poor, nobody cares for a poor person in this material world.
So that is why the poverty like Brahmanas is very much appreciated because that is voluntarily
taken for spiritual advancement.
But if that is forced by the laws of nature, then it takes away all good qualities.
So that is why yogi is given birth in a shri matam gehe, in a rich family so that he doesn't
have to work hard and waste time for arranging material necessities.
He can focus just on spiritual life.
Or sucinami is pure, Brahminical families where the habits are very satvik, very pure.
So automatically he will not indulge in sinful activities and he can continue his pious life.
And this is for the yogi who has little advance in spiritual life.
If a yogi is very much advance in spiritual life, then a different birth is given.
And what is that?
Athva yogi naam eva kule bhavati dhi matam, etadhi durlabh taram.
This is very very rare, durlabh taram, loke janma yadidhrisham.
Then he gets a birth which is very rare.
And what is that birth?
He takes his birth in a family of transcendentalists who are surely great in wisdom.
Such a birth is very rare in this world.
Prabhupada gives the example of Parikshit Maharaj.
Parikshit Maharaj took his birth in the family of Pandavas who are pure devotees, transcendentalists.
And the example is given of Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati Maharaj.
Bhakti Siddhanta Maharaj was born to Bhakti Vinod Thakur who is a very intimate associate
of Lord Chaitanya, empowered Acharya of Gaudiya Sampradaya.
So he took birth in a family of pure devotees.
And similarly Srila Prabhupada gives example of his own self, how his father also was a
pure devotee.
He always wanted my son should become a pure devotee.
He should not indulge in all such material activities.
So Prabhupada gives also example, many such instances I have shared in previous sessions.
When there was arrangement for Prabhupada's higher education, his father told no need
to go there in the West.
So going to West was a very very amazing opportunity that to going to London, the people who ruled
our country.
So the sons of kings and other very aristocratic families would go there.
Even now going to West is very sought after option.
But then at that time, just imagine opportunity for name, fame, unlimited wealth going to
London was rejected by Prabhupada's father.
He told I don't want my son to become a Mlecha.
This is called real father who is not caring for the house but caring for the entity which
is dwelling in the house.
So externally a person may get some good qualities, so called respectable qualities of material
world.
But internally that is not a good place to live.
So he rejected.
No, I don't want my son to go to the West to become Mlecha.
And he was training him in Mridanga.
He could have taught him various other skills.
Mridanga, who pays you for Mridanga, which job you get for Mridanga, what business he
will do by playing Mridanga.
But he was teaching Mridanga.
The parents usually pray for their children, please give him good health and let him become
very educated, very learned scholar, very strong.
All these blessings they ask from the sadhus.
But Prabhupada's father also would invite many, many sadhus to his house.
Some sadhus were not up to the mark, Prabhupada told.
But then nevertheless he was very respectful.
He was inviting and then he would pray simply, please bless my son so that he can become
servant of Radharani.
This was the prayer.
So this is the prayer which all the parents should do for their children.
Please let my child become a son of Radharani.
My daughter become a son of Radharani.
So this is called being a real parent, caring for the soul.
The soul doesn't have to see the miserable face of this material world again.
And then Prabhupada got married.
And after marriage, Prabhupada expressed dissatisfaction to his father that I'm not satisfied with
my wife.
So yes, we should not see all these pastimes on a mundane level.
These are all transcendental affairs.
So Prabhupada, when he expressed such thing, so his father told it is very nice.
If somebody is not very much attracted to his wife, that is very good for spiritual advancement.
So if you are not very happy, very satisfied, that is very nice.
So just see, this is the perspective of a pure devotee.
If the relative's family is compatible, they use the compatibility to do together Krishna
bhajan and advance in spiritual life.
If they are not compatible, they use it to get detachment from the material world.
So that is why a devotee should not worry at all about changing material circumstances.
We should just learn the art of yoga.
The art of yoga is how to use every circumstance for spiritual advancement.
This is called Vyavasaya Atmika Bodhi, business like intelligence.
Businessman is called Vyavasaya.
Vyavasaya Atmika, fixed intelligence means he just wants to see profit, a businessman
from every situation, every dealing.
In a similar fashion, the yogi, he wants to just take out spiritual advancement from every
situation.
There is no need to fix the situation.
Any situation can be used for spiritual advancement.
So thus Prabhupada tells, we were fortunate that we also took birth in family of pure
devotees.
And similarly, Prabhupada gives the example of Meera Bhai.
She was playing with the dolls from the birth because of devotee family and later on she
became very advanced devotee of Krishna.
So this is very rare birth.
This is given to either Nitya Siddhas who come from spiritual world to spread the message
or very, very advanced transcendentalists.
Then when a person takes birth in such families, he is not lost.
He again revised the divine consciousness of his previous life.
How he revised?
Because Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita, we will see.
All the remembrance, all the knowledge and forgetfulness, it comes from God.
Depending upon the desire of living entity, whatever we desire, that will be fulfilled.
If you want to crack some good examination, get a good thing, then Krishna will inspire
from the heart.
You cannot do it without doing tapasya, without doing charity, without doing punya, pious
activities, yajna.
So Krishna will inspire us that foolish, don't you just work very hard.
Nothing will happen by that.
Krishna will engage from the heart in doing pious activities, in yajna, in dhan, in tap
and by austerities, penances, charity and sacrifice, a person will be able to attain
such position.
Although after attaining such a position also, there is no, that is just the one-sided look
of the situation, just like Midas, Midas wanted to have a golden touch, whatever it touches
turns gold.
And then he got that boon and he became very happy, but he could not understand the consequence
of such a boon.
So whatever he was touching, it was turning gold.
Initially he became very happy, oh it is a wonderful thing, but then he was very hungry
and anything he is touching, that is also becoming gold.
He cannot eat gold.
So if he became very worried, what would I do?
And then the daughter came running towards the father and as soon as he touched the daughter,
the daughter also became a golden statue.
So this is the situation of a materialist.
He is not able to see the other side, Krishna tells, any kind of material enjoyment only
produces misery like Midas.
But anyway, Krishna guides from the heart.
So person who is yogi, Krishna guides the yogi also from the heart.
In previous life you did this.
So automatically, Krishna explains in the next shloka, vash means control, avasha means
without control automatically, by virtue of divine consciousness of previous life, automatically
he becomes attracted to yogic principles.
He will not be very much interested in the rituals, means the rituals which are mentioned
in the Vedas.
So that a person can come to the standard understanding of yoga down the line.
But such a person, transcendentalist, is not attracted by the ritualistic activities
of the Vedas and directly takes to the yogic practice because he had completed to some
extent in the previous life.
So there is no loss or diminution in this path, as we have seen in the second chapter
Lord Krishna mentions, whatever he has done, he has made even 1% progress.
Then he starts in the next life over that 1%.
He has done 5% progress over 5%, 6% onwards.
He has done 50%, then he has to just finish 50% more in the next life.
In this way, all these credits are getting accumulated life after life.
So such a person is not lost, he gets a good birth.
If he goes to the spiritual world, anyway there is no loss.
In material world, he goes to heavenly planets, comes down in good families.
If he is advanced directly, he will take birth in transcendentalist, transcendental families.
And then Krishna will remind him, automatically he will be attracted to the yogic principles.
And when the yogi engages himself in sincere endeavour, making further progress, being
washed off all contaminations and after many many births of practice, he attains the supreme
goal.
So perfection in spiritual life is not easy, it takes many many births of practice.
When the heart is completely cleansed, there is no material desire, then a person is able
to attain supreme goal.
So Lord Krishna tells,
So there are various kinds of workers in the material world, karmī, jñāni, tapasvi and
yogi.
So Lord Krishna explains,
Karmī is the predominant population who want to work very hard to enjoy the fruit of that
activity.
And the jñāni is further level, when a person starts renouncing the results of his activities,
And by such charitable disposition, he advances in knowledge.
And he understands these fruits only are the cause of my problem, my anxiety, my lamentation
and these fruits never satisfy me, one fruit if I eat, I want two fruits tomorrow.
So such sense is developed by giving charity, engaging in karma yoga, giving up the result
of the activity.
Then when a person's intelligence clears up, he becomes jñāni.
And then he starts understanding, he starts exploring the absolute truth, what is this
world all about?
Who has designed it?
What is the purpose?
And then jñāni then engages in tapasya, austerity.
He understands for purification of my life, for gaining uninterrupted happiness.
As we have seen throughout the Vedas, bhāvatam, everywhere.
Human life is only meant for tapasya.
It is totally converse understanding of what people are being taught today.
Human life is meant for enjoyment.
Now you work so that you can enjoy.
Human life is meant for tapasya.
So if a person takes up austerities, that is very, very auspicious path.
And then the knowledge of yoga is revealed to the person.
So Krishna is very clearly telling here that sometimes people tell no, no, no, jñāni is
good or tapasvi is good.
No, we should not get carried away.
We may see somebody is there, some sadhu is doing lot of tapasya.
He is walking without clothes on his body and he has learned how to brave the chilling
weather of zero degrees and he has controlled his eating to a great extent and like this
lot of tapasya he is doing.
Or somebody is there who is jñāni, who has all the knowledge of the Vedas and read everything.
We may think, oh, he's very advanced person in spiritual life, but Lord Krishna is telling
no.
Krishna is clearly giving his conclusion, yogi is higher than a karmī, higher than
a jñāni and higher than tapasvi also.
Now which kind of yogi?
Yogis are of various kinds, karma yogi, jñāni yogi, ashtanga yogi, bhakti yogi.
Yogi is better than all these categories.
Now among all the various kinds of yogis, this is clear, a person has to become yogi.
So Arjuna was trying to become like karmī, then he was trying to become a jñāni like
that.
But then Krishna tells Arjuna, please become a yogi.
Ultimately, all these paths are meant to connect a person.
So there are various kinds of yogis, there is brahmavadi, parmatmavadi and there is devotee.
Devotee means a person is trying to have connection with God.
So connection can be of various levels.
Just like a person who is touching the sun rays, he is also touching the sun and who
has entered the sun planet, he is also touching.
And the person who has met sun god personally and all these effulgences because of the body
of the sun god, just like we see here also.
So it is not very wonderful thing.
Here we have fireflies, they also emit light.
Similarly, sun god, his body emits amazing light.
And sun god is the source of all effulgence of that planet that we see here.
And somebody can directly go and meet sun god, that is the most intimate association.
If we are chatting with somebody, we are connected with him.
That is also called your connection.
If we are calling somebody, then also we are connected.
That is more intimate contact.
And if we are physically talking, touching somebody, then that is the best contact, best
connection.
So that is why although a Jnana yogi is also in connection with Krishna, but he is in connection
with Krishna's energy, with the Brahma Jyoti, he is situated in Brahma.
So he is connected to Krishna just like a person is chatting, not very much connected.
And an Ashtanga yogi, he is more connected to Krishna, he is connected to Paramatma.
And a Bhakti yogi is very very intimately connected with Krishna.
So that's what Lord Krishna explains in the next shloka.
This is the final shloka.
Final shlokas are very important.
So Krishna tells, now final conclusion.
Yoginam api sarvesham madgatena antaratmana
Shraddhavaan bhajateyomaam sameyukta tamo mataha
Yoginam api sarvesham, there are various yogis, Krishna is agreeing, sarvesham.
And of all the yogis, madgatena antaratmana, he who always abides in me with great faith,
Shraddhavaan bhajatey, worshipping me in transcendental loving service.
Yo mom, sameyukta tamo mataha is most intimately united with me in yoga and that is the highest
of all.
So all are united with Krishna, but the person who is engaged in Shraddhavaan bhajatey, transcendental
loving service, he is most intimately united with Krishna and yukta tamo mataha, he is
the greatest yogi, he is the highest of all.
So who tells that in Bhagavad Gita, Lord Krishna is telling, oh gyani is best or karma yoga
is best or any path you follow that is all good.
So these people have not read even six chapters of Bhagavad Gita.
Krishna tells, not any path you can follow.
There are various paths, tapasvi, gyani, but the path of yogi is best.
Among all the yogis also, it is not that you can follow anything or anything will lead
you to the same result.
No, Krishna is telling, no, only the devotee is doing actually yoga.
He is most intimately united with me and he is the highest of all.
Lord Krishna is very clearly mentioning here.
So what is the evidence of it?
Yes, so that is why it is called Gita Upanishad, this Bhagavad Gita, Upanishad means bringing
us closer to God, these principles, knowledge would be given, but then in order to help
us understand better these texts, supplementary literatures are given to us and those are
called puranas, which help us understand the principle of the Upanishads.
So purana means history, itihas is also history, itihas is recent history, Rama and Mahabharat
just happened few thousands of years ago or lakhs of years ago and purana means trillions
of years ago and in previous lifetime of Brahma, previous creation of various planets all such
histories are given, purana means very old history.
So if something is a law, just like in an advocate argues in a court of law, so it gives
citations of previous judgments.
So in a similar fashion, if this is fact what we are reading here, then where is the evidence?
Does it apply practically?
Has it happened in this world?
So yes, there are many, many such instances and was such instances that of the greatest
yogi of all times, greatest Ashtanga yogi, he is Durvasa Muni.
So Durvasa Muni was a very, very powerful yogi, mystic yogi, the process which is described
in this chapter and thus he had developed various, he got amazing siddhis powers and
there was another person who was most intimately united with Krishna, the greater yogi than
even Ashtanga yogi, who is always engaged in, so this bhaj word we don't understand
properly usually.
So here Prabhupada is very nicely mentioning, renders transcendental loving service.
So simply giving some respect from a distance or worshipping is not the proper word, bhajate
means engaging in transcendental loving seva, service, that is called bhajan, engaging your
senses in the service of supreme lord.
So such a yogi is highest.
And we saw in the previous session how Amrish Maharaj was greatest yogi.
Although he was emperor of the planet, great many responsibilities were there upon him.
Amrish Maharaj was always thinking about the lotus feet of Krishna in his heart.
Was he discussing politics?
He was discussing Krishna katha, Vaikuntha katha always.
From his hands he was doing mandir marjan, he was cleansing the floor of the temple.
He is a king but he is cleaning the temple floor with his own hands.
He can enjoy various, no, workers, no, he is cleaning with his own hands.
It is told in Goloka Vrindavan there is no dust, Krishna's planet, but there also gopis
are engaged in cleaning the walls and floors just so that they can attract the attention
of Krishna.
So our entire spiritual advancement depends upon seva mukhe hi jiva dhau, how much we
have oriented ourselves in service attitude.
So if you are always thinking how to satisfy Krishna, how to satisfy Krishna, how to satisfy
Krishna, how to attract attention of Krishna, this is the attitude and doing some activities
by which we can attract Krishna's attention.
This is the way of spiritual revelation and advancement.
Krishna reveals himself to such a devotee who is always thinking and acting in a way
to satisfy Krishna.
Just like a lover is thinking how to satisfy my beloved, what action can I do now?
What should I do?
Should I do some gift?
Should I give some money?
Which activity should I do?
So in a similar fashion Amrish Maharaj, the gopis, there is no dust they are cleaning
so that they can attract attention of Krishna.
Amrish Maharaj was personally cleaning the floor.
His ears were engaged in hearing the Krishna katha.
And all the senses were engaged in service of Krishna, the flowers which are offered
to lotus feet of Krishna, he was engaged in smelling those flowers, his olfactory sense.
His skin was engaged in touching the body of his pure devotees.
So in this way Amrish Maharaj was doing bhajan, engaging all the senses in the service of
Krishna.
This is called bhajate.
And this Durvasa Muni once went to Amrish Maharaj and he was little envious because
he is very powerful but then this king who is living amidst all comforts in the palace,
living an opulent life, he is being given more respect than this austere person.
So then he visited to the palace of Amrish Maharaj and Amrish Maharaj was engaged in
year long austerity of severe vows, especially following the Ekadashivrata along with his
wife who was also equally qualified like Amrish Maharaj.
So Prabhupada tells this is the purpose of marriage in Vedic culture.
So people tell what is the need of marriage now and thus they tell that consensual sex
is very nice.
Marriage was allowed in Vedic culture and marriage is ultimately for sex with a commitment.
So with commitment, if you can enjoy sex pleasure outside, what is the need of marriage?
They tell.
And thus there is a lot of consensual sex happening throughout the life.
A person remains like dog, always anxious when will I get my next partner?
And he's never able to think of solving all the problems of life and attaining spiritual
happiness.
So no purpose of marriage life is to find a partner who is of similarly spiritual qualification
so that a person can get helped in spiritual advancement.
Just like now the business families, they try to get their children married so that
their business can improve.
This is the criteria.
So for a spiritualist, for real Vedic culture marriage, the criteria is I should find a
person who is advanced in spiritual culture.
Thus we don't find that the husband and wife after marriage, they are enjoying sensual
pleasures.
The money who got the daughter of Manu, the original personality, origin of all the human
beings, very, very qualified.
She was so beautiful that when when Gandharva was flying in the plane and she was playing
with a ball on the rooftop and he got so much bewildered, he fell down from his plane seeing
her beauty.
But after getting such wife, he did not enjoy.
He continued.
He accepted by for spiritual advancement, continue doing his austerities over shipping
supreme personality.
And then they became she was princess, but she was living in a hut to satisfy the husband
and she became very weak, very thin.
And but she never complained.
She was serving the husband very nicely.
And then finally, the money he got some pity that poor princess, she has come here.
I'm supposed to give her fulfill her desires.
And so this is how the purpose is of the marriage life in the Vedic culture.
So Amrish Maharaj had a very nice wife who was equally qualified and both were engaged
in austerity of falling Vrata.
So on the day of Dwadashi Ekadashi, we are supposed to fast and Dwadashi we should break
the fasting.
It is very, very important.
So Durvasa Muni went on the time of Dwadashi to Maharaj Amrish Amrish Maharaj immediately
made him seated.
He fell down on his feet and he offered respects.
That is a duty of Kshatriya to worship Brahmana like supreme personality of Godhead.
And Durvasa Muni accepted and he told kindly honor prasadam.
He told, let me do my daily duties.
You have to take bath, meditate and then before accepting prasadam.
So he went to Yamuna, Maharaj Amrish was ruling from Mathura, Madhuvan.
That place was called before.
So he went to take bath and then Amrish Maharaj got in dilemma because only a muhurth was
left to break the fast otherwise it is an offense.
So that is why whimsical fast should not be done.
I do Tuesday fasting, Thursday fasting, Wednesday fasting.
No Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita, we have seen unauthorized fasting gives pain to the
super soul, unnecessary austerity we should not do.
So austerity should be done which helps us to advance in spiritual life.
So there are proper rules and regulations when to do fast, when not to do fast.
So on Dwadashi we should not do fast, we should break it.
So he got confused now.
So if I break fast that is another offense that without receiving the guest I have broken
my fast and so that will be offense if I take now and if I do not take that will be offense
for the fasting regulation.
So what will I do now?
So he consulted Brahmanas and after their consultation he suggested and they all concluded
it is right he can take some water.
Water means it is told the Vedic injunction is there.
Water is taken as a food item and it is also not taken as a food item.
So water can be consumed both ways.
So suppose you are fasting you take water that can be taken as breaking of fast and
suppose you want to fast you don't want to take any food simply by taking water that
is also considered as not taking any food because it is water.
So water has got this definition.
So depending upon time place it can be taken to break fast it can be taken to do fast also.
So he took some water in order to he has not eaten also and he has eaten in that sense.
But when Durvasa Muni came back and Durvasa Muni buys yogic powers.
So this is the power of yogi he can figure out past present future all these things.
He immediately got to know Amrish Maharaj has taken water.
He became very angry.
Just see this person he poses himself as devotee of Vishnu and he is very selfish man.
He is envious person.
He does not know how to respect a guest even and he is posing himself as a great devotee
of Vishnu.
Now I will punish you properly.
Immediately plucked out a bunch of hairs and a very very fierce demon was produced Brahma
Rakshas was produced and that Rakshas was so fiery there is lot of fire at the time
of annihilation destruction of the universe and that demon appeared like that fire of
devastation and it is told when the demon was walking the earth was trembling with every
step of it and Brahma Rakshas is among the most dangerous ghosts when a Brahmana dies
soul somehow if he becomes ghost he takes the form of Brahma Rakshas very powerful so
with a trident in his hand he started walking towards Amrish Maharaj.
So suppose such we see a ghost walking towards us what to speak of Brahma Rakshas.
So what will happen immediately a person would get scared and but it is described in Bhagavatam
how was Amrish Maharaj he was standing there with folded hands I have offended great Rishi
and he saw Rakshas being produced coming towards him to eat him he did not take any he did
not move even an inch.
So this only a pure devotee can do he is completely free from all fear because he is always absorbed
in thoughts of lotus feet of Krishna he surrendered to Krishna thinking that everything is happening
under control of Krishna.
So he stood there with folded hands without moving even an inch without the least disturbance
he stood there and then immediately something happens there is a very bright effulgence and
that Brahma Rakshas immediately is burned to ashes and Sudarshan Chakra appeared there.
So Amrish Maharaj was so much devoted to Krishna Krishna sent his Sudarshan Chakra immediately.
So a person may wonder how Amrish Maharaj was ruling the entire planet and he is doing
Mandir Marjana Adishu and he is discussing Krishna Kata hearing thinking of Krishna.
So everything happens Prabhupada tells in spiritual consciousness or in spiritual world everything
happens automatically in material world you have to work very very hard there is a by
that we can understand on which potency Shakti we are situated if there is lot of hard work
in our life that means we are situated in material energy with their nations karma
sanghya Anya Tritiya Shakti ishyate external potency in spiritual consciousness and spiritual
world things happen automatically.
So Krishna takes care of such devotees protection and maintenance and all the administration.
So immediately for his protection Sudarshan Chakra was sent by Krishna and then Durvasa
Muni saw Sudarshan Chakra approaching him immediately started running here and there
in the caves of the mountains and jungles everywhere but wherever he went he was seeing
Sudarshan Chakra is chasing him and Durvasa Muni got very very afraid now who will save
me everywhere this Sudarshan Chakra comes behind me.
So then he thought let me go to the original person Brahma and he went to Brahma ji and
Brahma told this Sudarshan Chakra we are all worshipping Lord Hari and how can I do
anything to save you from his weapon please go away Brahma denied any refuge then he went
to Lord Shiva Shiva is higher than Lord Brahma and he told Lord Shiva please fillet the feet
I am your devotee please save me protect me.
So Lord Shiva told there are many many universes and all the universes have got many many Brahma's
and many many Shiva's we all rotate in this universe under the instruction of that Lord
Hari so you have offended his devotee please go and take shelter of him he only can give
you shelter so we are also feeling the heat of this Sudarshan Chakra please go away.
So in this way when he was a few sheltered even by Lord Shiva so then he thought now
I have to go to take shelter of Lord Vishnu he went he fell prostrate at the feet of Lord
Vishnu please save me and then Lord Krishna told oh you have come here to take my shelter
but I am not independent in giving shelter Lord Krishna tells Lord Vishnu tells him and
just see this yogi so powerful he has gone to Vishnu Loka only the liberated souls are
able to go there but some very exceptional yogis just like Durvasa although not liberated
but he was able to go there to Vishnu Loka which is a placement only for devotees but
he could not stay there of course you have to be a devotee to stay there so then Lord
Vishnu told so it is not possible I am not independent I cannot control this Sudarshan
Chakra I am under the control of my devotee my devotee is my heart my devotees I do not
wish to enjoy anything in this world without my devotees so do not think Lord Krishna is
some kind of autocrat who wants to make the devotees as slaves and enjoy no he is just like
a kind father father doesn't wish to enjoy without his family members he just wishes that my son
remain obedient to me and he live with me he lives with me in a similar fashion Krishna does
not wish to enjoy without the devotees he just wishes the devotee should live with Krishna so
I am under control of my devotee you have offended my devotee there is only one solution you have
to go down and fall at the feet of the devotee so I am under his control I am not free the supreme
personality is controlled by devotee and then he tells what to speak of devotees the devotees
of devotee also I am controlled by them they are very dear to me so this is very very important
so this exact word is used Lord Krishna is telling devotee of my devotee is more dear to me
so that is why we should not aspire I should become direct devotee of Krishna but devotee
of devotee that is why worshipping the spiritual master is very very powerful rather it is more
effective than directly worshipping Krishna because if you directly want to please Krishna
it is not easy but the devotees of Lord Krishna they are very very merciful and they very easily
get pleased so that is why Lord Krishna tells worship of my devotees is greater than my worship
directly so that is why we were discussing how to control mind Rahugan Maharaj was instructed by
Jadh Bharat by the astra by weapon of Hare Guru by worshipping the charan by doing the charan upasana
worshipping the lotus feet of Hari and Guru so that is why we worship Guru a pure devotee
spiritual master that is very easy way of spiritual advancement so ultimately Amrish Maharaj
he was standing there and one year had passed when he was traveling across one year he kept on
running and Amrish Maharaj just kept on standing at that place in a mood of humble this is the
mood of devotee he does not take any offense a person is coming to kill him but for his personal
self he's always surrendered he's always humble and he was waiting when will the brahmana sage
come back he was expecting him so after one year after running traversing the boundaries and beyond
of the universe he came back fell at the feet of Amrish Maharaj and he was very much embarrassed
great Saudis falling at me he's not telling the auto criminal without any this thing you are
envious of me you let a brahma rakshasa lose on me to kill me no he's very embarrassed and when he
heard prayers from him of protection immediately started offering prayers to sudarshan
that please stop me kindly leave kindly excuse and the sudarshan finally excused
so thus we can understand here again how vaishnava pradhis so severe even krishna doesn't give
shelter of to a vaishnava pradhi rather krishna sees that you are punished krishna will sell
sudarshan chakra a vaishnava does not take offense vaishnava is very humble but if the devotee is
offended this is the first offense we cannot relish chanting if we blaspheme the devotees who
have dedicated their life for propagating the holy name the devotee could be of sanatana dharma
hindu religion of islam of christianity of any religion some people fanatic people they criticize
the preachers of other religions this is very bad they are least advanced in krishna consciousness
and they will not advance unless they learn to respect all the preachers of god consciousness
anybody who has given the message please become devotee of god lover of god chant his name he's
empowered representative of krishna and it is vaishnava that is offense a person can never
chant offenselessly holy name by offending such preachers so we should not have this
fanatic understanding respect all the devotees especially the preachers of god and if there is
some offense by chance there is some percentage of chance that somebody has become offended
we should go and fall at the feet of the devotee this is the only relief otherwise a person loses
his spiritual growth loses his material assets also immediately so thus vaishnava is one very
important thing we understand how severe it is another very important instruction is the
practical application of this shloka how the bhakti yogi although independently does not know these
mystical powers but because he is dependent upon the krishna all the powers of krishna are ready
for his protection so that is where prabhupada will don't try to show some magic you remain
dependent upon krishna remain pure devotee of krishna and magic will be done by krishna some
people think prabhupada by having some mystical magical power he could control so many people
and like that probably no i was not even expecting people will take up to krishna consciousness
but you remain simply surrendered pure devotee of krishna and krishna will do the magic
so thus we should remember this very important shloka we should not get bewildered by any other
process of gyan yoga raj yoga hatha yoga dhyani yoga karma yoga anything else here krishna has
very clearly mentioned yogi namapi sarvesham madh gatena antaratmana who is always thinking of me
within his heart shaddhavan with great faith bhajate he is engaging in my service he is best he is a
greatest yogi of all so please have faith we are following the right path the greatest path
and we are on the way of becoming the greatest yogi with this we will end today's
