We have discussed the yama and niyama means the do's and the don'ts of yoga system which are very very important before even begin to enter into some physical activity and mental activities.
Then there are physical and mental activities asana and pranayama, pratyahara, dhyana, dharana and finally a yogi is expected to reach samadhi.
And along with following the yoga practice, the demands of the body have to be met, we also saw this.
A person who eats too much cannot become a yogi, who eats too less also cannot become a yogi.
So we saw in the last verse it is explained, extravagance in the matter of eating, mating, sleeping and defending, it can block one's spiritual advancement.
So this is very important, eating, mating, defense.
So these things are important, but extravagance in the matter of eating, sleeping, defending.
If we try to protect ourselves too much, let us have so much of bank balance and this thing and too much of defending, then it will spoil our spiritual advancement, there is no dependence on God.
If we eat too much, senses become very very powerful and they drag mind intelligence like anything towards suffering.
So eating should be regulated, it is very very important. Sleeping should be regulated.
So when a person is regulated in these activities, then he can make advancement.
So this regulation also we saw how it is very very important for a yogi to be regulated.
And as you can see it is highlighted above because the yogi is regulated.
He is regulated in all his work, speech, sleep, wakefulness and all other bodily activities, there is no material misery for him.
So if a person wants to avoid material misery, he simply has to be very very regulated.
So the demands of the body, if they are undermet or they are over met, both are the cause of trouble.
As I explained before, Srila Prabhupada explains that if a person eats too much, he will get diabetes and if he eats too less, he will get tuberculosis.
So either things are not good, over eating or under eating.
So that is why regulation, yukta hara viharasya yukta cheshtasya karmasu.
Regulation is very very important when a person is regulated in his work.
So that is why many times people ask that Prabhu I am chanting 16 rounds and following other things, but still there is misery in life.
So to get rid of miseries, devotional service is not required and the aim of devotional service is not to make the material misery zero.
Material miseries can become very easily zero by devotional service.
But devotional service is meant for something beyond.
It is to take us to a stage of positive, unlimited, transcendental happiness, samadhi.
Otherwise material, to remove, eliminate material misery, simply satvaguna is sufficient.
If a person is satvik, satvik means regulated.
So if there is regulation in our work, are we working in a regulated manner?
Do we start our work at a fixed time, finish our work in a fixed time, work limited number of hours, limited number of days, that is called regulation of work.
I work as per my plan, not as per how my mind drags me into work.
As if I work, as if I am obliged to do the work.
I am not attached to the results of my work.
This is called regulated work, working in the service of Krishna.
If you do, then you get positive happiness.
Otherwise, also, if you do regulated work and you don't get attached, you renounce the results of your work immediately.
Lord Krishna mentions, he has mentioned in so many places, we have been seeing, this is the first instruction.
Give up the result of work, give up the result of work.
People want shanti by accumulating the result of work, that is stealing.
Antaram means interval, anantaram means without any interval.
Continuous peace is there when a person renounces the results of his work.
Automatically a person becomes peaceful.
So these are the laws of nature.
You break the laws of nature, mental disturbance.
You follow these things, then there is immediately peace of mind.
So if there is regulation in person's work, he is very disciplined in his work.
He works as if he is obliged to do the work and not attached to the results of the work.
He gives up the result.
Simply this thing will make a person peaceful.
And what to speak of if he works for Krishna or he offers the result of work for Krishna.
Similarly, regulation is speech.
Sometimes we speak too much, that becomes cause of disturbance for others and for ourselves.
Sometimes we don't speak at all.
Sleeping too much, sleeping very less, both will give disease.
Wakefulness, too much or too little, same thing, both are the causes of disturbance.
And all bodily activities, a person should be regulated.
So this is called civilization.
Civilization means civilization should be peaceful.
So there is no possibility of peace without regulation.
Now everyone is agitated.
And Ved Vyas already predicted.
Upadurta means always in anxiety.
People in Karyuga would be very, very anxious.
Anyway, material world is miserable, but they are expert to make it more miserable by losing all the regulations.
Whenever whatever we wish we are trying to do.
So that is that will not make us happy.
And now all these things people are studying and they are doing research and they're getting Nobel Prize.
Oh, no, no, no, there is one clock biological clock in every cell.
And that logs gives a direction to the cell when to do a particular work.
That block follows the motion of the sun.
So that is why our bodily activity should be regulated.
There is a proper time to sleep.
The cell is optimized.
Every cell in our body is optimized to work in that fashion.
If you make artificial lights, nighttime is for sleep.
If there are no lights, people have to sleep.
If there is no electricity, people have to sleep.
But we have invented these artificial things and thus breaking the biological cell, which cycle biological clock, which every cell has.
So now people are realizing we have to be very disciplined without discipline.
There is no question of happiness.
Discipline regulation is important.
And to be very, very disciplined, a person has to be a disciple.
He has to accept somebody as his authority.
Then he can be regulated.
So that is a sleeping on time, sleeping sufficient hours, getting up on time, neither underdoing nor overdoing is important for material happiness.
So we have to follow positive principles.
We have to do chanting.
We have to do reading.
We have to do hearing and other things and follow regulations also.
Then yoga, bhavati, dukkha.
It is so important.
That is why Krishna has dedicated two shlokas for this thing.
Positive practices of yoga along with regulated lifestyle is very, very important.
Now, when a person engages in practice of yoga system and he follows these regulations,
then what happens?
Then Lord Krishna is explaining.
When the yogi by practice of yoga, yogasevaya, disciplines his mental activities
and become situated in transcendence, devoid of all material desires, he is said to have attained yoga.
So when a person is said to have attained yoga, so yoga means to connect with God.
When do we understand that a person has established his connection with God?
Then by practice of yoga, one disciplines his mental activities.
So again, discipline word is used and become situated in transcendence, devoid of all material desires.
So a person can be absorbed in the bodily platform and get carried away by the gross desires,
or he can be absorbed on the mental platform, intellectual platform and then spiritual or transcendental platform.
So to raise yourself to the transcendental platform, one needs certain discipline.
And discipline is required.
Regulation, discipline, tapasya in life is required that everyone does.
And whether it be a student, student has to follow some particular discipline.
He has to study these many subjects and gain some kind of expertise under an expert coach or teachers.
Then he will get some siddhis, siddhis material perfection, nothing else.
Now we are talking, we are sitting miles apart, thousands of miles away.
People are there hearing from other countries also.
So how you are hearing from some other country?
And so far our voice is reaching, the image is reaching, this is siddhi, siddhi is material perfection.
So behind this lot of tapasya has gone, lot of discipline, rigor they have undertaken.
So this discipline is important for any siddhi, any kind of material happiness or success.
And not just students, even sports person, they also have to follow rigorous discipline.
Simply just to learn the discipline of a racket, you know, they spend so much time.
They also have to sleep on time, get up on time, eat few things, avoid few things.
They have to be very regulated in their eating.
They have to be very, very regulated in their every activity.
Coach will tell, don't watch television, you'll get next sprain and your performance may get disturbed.
Wear certain kind of shoes, certain kind of socks, certain kind of dress.
Everything matters.
If you want to attain something, what is success for them?
Maybe medal in some Olympics or Commonwealth or some international event.
That is their success.
That is the happiness that they want.
So to attain this happiness of a gold medal, they undergo rigorous discipline of racket.
They simply know the art of controlling the racket.
Somebody is learning that of controlling the bat.
Somebody is learning that of controlling the electrons.
You know, everyone is trying to control control is very important.
Without controlling matter material nature, you cannot gain any happiness.
We are helplessly being pushed by the matter.
So people want to control matter and by controlling, they want to attain certain kind of happiness.
However, all these kinds of happiness are not going to satisfy us.
So yogi is also engaged in controlling.
But what is the difference between control of yogi and control of a materialist?
Sheila Prabhupada explains in the purport.
The activities of the yogi are distinguished from those of an ordinary person by his characteristic cessation from all kinds of material desires,
of which sex is the chief.
So a yogi and a materialist externally, they may appear to be doing the same disciplinary actions or tapasya.
But how can we distinguish between a yogi?
Yes, if somebody is a strong yogi sitting there on the top of mountain, we can understand.
But a bhakti yogi, a karma yogi, he may work just like an ordinary materialist and just like Arjuna is fighting like any other materialist fighter,
but he's executing yoga in that fighting.
So how we can understand somebody is doing yoga or materialism.
So that is distinguished by characteristic cessation from all kinds of material desires.
So the difference is the yogi wants to control, wants to put cessation and end to all the material desires.
And a materialist wants to increase material desires.
They think by enjoying some material desires, fulfilling those desires, I'll become happy.
And the chief of all material desires is sex.
So actually, the world is nothing but sex and working hard to get sex.
That's it. You remove the sex and there is no motivation in this world.
And a yogi, he wants to control material desires of his sex is the chief.
So this is the purpose of entire Vedic knowledge.
Whatever we have, how to make this sex life zero.
This nobody will tell no yogi will tell no spiritualist will tell because their shops will close.
Everyone in this world is fond of sex.
If they think, oh my, this life is going to become zero, then I will not go.
But however, with an open mind, with an intelligent mind, if we analyze what is the sex desire,
which is making people so mad and people think they will become so happy by enjoying it.
So this is a great madness. Those who are enjoying, you see their life.
And if you also have experience of some enjoyment, we can also see from our experience.
And Srimad Bhagavatam describes small by Prahlad Maharaj is describing the nature of sex.
How small was describing five years old.
So that is why knowledge is not the subject matter of age.
If a person is sitting for 10 years in the same class, we will not tell who is most wise.
Why? Because 10 years he has been in the same class.
So knowledge is gained by hearing from perfect authorities who have got knowledge.
So although Prahlad Maharaj is five years old, he got knowledge from Narad Muni, his spiritual master.
So Narad Muni defined very beautifully and Prahlad Maharaj repeats.
The sex desire is like itching sensation.
The more you enjoy, the itching increases and the more you scratch it, it further increases.
And then the person becomes very, very disturbed.
He finds no means to satisfy and no sufficient chemicals and bodily strength or situations to satisfy.
And then he's always agitated and disturbed how to do it.
And there's so many crimes people commit.
This karma, sex life, very, very difficult to satisfy.
It is not satisfied at all.
The more you enjoy, the more it increases.
And then a person is completely bewildered.
So that is why marriage is not people think, oh, sex.
Why are we are telling like that?
Marriage is a Vedic culture.
And people think marriage is for enjoying sex pleasure.
No, it is the other way around.
Marriage is to stop sex life.
Because if there is no marriage, then there is unrestricted sex.
There is no responsibility.
And then people would waste their they'll spoil the entire society.
So that is why this marriage is there.
Why?
Because you have to take responsibility.
And there is a regulation.
A person has got limitation.
Now only with this person I can enjoy.
So this marriage is a way in all the religions to regulate the sex life.
Otherwise illicit sex like animals.
Entire life person is looking for partners like it happens in Mumbai.
We see it is very, very common or in Western countries.
Central the entire life.
He has become 60 years old.
And then he has become a sexist.
Central the entire life.
He has become 60 years old.
And then he is or she is marrying.
Second time, third time.
Is this the time to marry?
So entire life person has become old, but he'll be looking for sex partner.
But if there is marriage, then the person is regulated, fixed.
Then you can focus.
Now what to do now for the spiritual life?
So that is why Dharma Artha Kama Moksha.
This is what the Vedas recommend.
So this is very strong pull in human body or all the living, all the bodies.
So in order to regulate this thing, the Vedas mentioned Vedas know it is not possible to control.
So first of all, Dharma.
So these are the four Purush Arthas endeavors, which are mentioned in the Vedas.
The regular process of salvation.
First of all, a person has to follow Dharma.
Dharma means religion.
And by following Dharma, what will happen?
A person can get resources without following Dharma.
If a person wants to make money, that money will cause unlimited problems to the person.
And when a person follows Dharma, then automatically all the resources, material resources will be given to him.
In a legal way, he will not suffer for it.
Money can be amassed by any way.
But if you work in a legitimate way, that money can be kept with you.
Otherwise, money will be taken away.
Person will put into jail also.
So without Dharma, if people directly go for economic development, we can see what is happening in the world today.
More and more stress, all the disorders in the climate, in person's life, mind everywhere will happen.
So if we follow Dharma, there would be natural prosperity.
And a person will not be implicated in more suffering.
So follow Dharma laws, some codes of conduct.
And then you will get automatically all the resources for enjoyment.
That is called Artha.
And after getting resources for enjoyment, what are we supposed to do?
Then you enjoy, that is called Kama, third level.
Kama is lusty desires, desire to enjoy the material senses.
Sex is the chief, but any material desire is called lust or Kama.
Then you enjoy the senses.
And what will happen once you have indulged yourself in sense enjoyment?
The natural result will be dissatisfaction.
As Lord Krishna has mentioned previously, the more you go out of regulation, discipline in your life,
and the more you try to enjoy, indulge in any enjoyment, which is not required for keeping body and soul together,
it only creates misery and dissatisfaction.
So that is why the fourth stage is mentioned, Moksha.
Moksha means liberation, stopping all the material enjoyment.
So people naturally in a civilized society would follow this thing.
Although the ultimate aim is liberation, but people are not so intelligent to think of it in that manner.
That is why this gradual process is mentioned.
First of all, you follow Dharma, be religious.
And then after Dharma following the codes of conduct, you get economic resources automatically.
And by those resources, you can try to satisfy your desires, whatever you think will satisfy you.
And you will realize, no, no, no, satisfaction is not there.
I'm getting more and more dissatisfied by increasing my enjoyment.
So there is a very beautiful example also, historical example of Maharaj Yayati.
All the Greek rulers, they were actually they had migrated from India.
And that is why you see many, many similarities in the culture
and in the names of their gods, Greek gods and everything.
It matches very much with the Vedic understanding.
And even many, many terms are also seen in Iran and all those places.
You see the culture, the way they follow.
So Maharaj Yayati was their father and the rulers of the Middle East who migrated from India.
And Maharaj Yayati, somehow he got cursed that untimely he became very, very old.
And Maharaj Yayati, then he was repenting and his wife's father only cursed him.
Now wife also is saying, oh, my husband has become very old.
So naturally, the father-in-law took some pity and he told, OK, in one condition.
So now it has gone. The curse I have given to you.
So this is called destiny, something which is fixed.
We cannot avoid. But yes, there are some laws family members can share it.
Any good activity you do or bad activity you do.
The result is shared by the family members.
So he told, if now this curse I have given, nothing can be done.
But one remedy can be done.
If your son agrees, you have four sons, any son agrees,
then you can take his youthhood and he will become old.
So then this Maharaj Yayati was so much greedy for sexual enjoyment
that he requested his sons shamelessly.
They were all young, much younger. They are supposed to enjoy.
But then he's telling Maharaj Yayati, no, I want to enjoy.
And he is requesting his sons that please try to take my old age.
I am not satisfied. I want to enjoy life.
And the son in the Vedic culture is supposed to follow the father as it is without any question.
But somehow the sons disagreed.
So that is why he was dissatisfied with them.
One was Maharaj Yadu also.
Maharaj Yadu did not follow his father's instruction because he was devotee of Krishna.
He was knowing, no, if I become old, it would be difficult for Krishna to execute his plan.
Krishna will come in my one shot. So I have to produce children.
I cannot become old now.
So for devotional service, a person can disobey, but not otherwise.
So one son agreed.
And then Maharaj Yayati, again, he became very young.
And then he started enjoying.
But then even after he was blessed with a very, very long life, he lived for a thousand more years or like that.
But even after that, he was dissatisfied.
So then he expresses wonderful prayers in Bhagavatam that what is this sex life?
I made my son old, but still I'm not satisfied.
So that is why Brahmachari means try to control the sex search.
First ashram and then it is allowed.
If you cannot control and then one prastha, one prastha means again stop.
So sex life in the Vedic culture also is allowed only for around 25 years.
When the body stout and strong, you should stop it and leave the house and you can be with your wife.
But both of them should be in jungle or on pilgrimage.
And without any sexual indulgence, they should try to engage in spiritual life in the service of Krishna.
And then finally sannyas.
So this is how the Vedic life is designed.
So it is it may be difficult for some of us to digest that how we are telling it is impractical.
No, it is very much practical.
People have been doing it rather.
This is impractical trying to enjoy in this material world.
There would never be satiation of the desires.
So that is why intelligent person by proper guidance, he tries to regulate this desire.
So this is the difference between a yogi and a materialist.
External activities may be the same.
He is doing the same job.
He's working in the same way, working on the same system.
But the objective is different.
His consciousness is different.
His results are being given to different cause.
One is giving up all results for spiritual cause.
Another person is enjoying keeping all the results for his personal enjoyment.
So one increases his sex desire.
Another person reduces his sex desire.
So perfect yogi so well disciplined in the activities of the mind that he can no longer be disturbed by any kind of material desires.
So this is very, very important.
So, yes, I need to control, but not the racket, not the bat, not the electrons.
I need to control my mind.
This is very important.
Human life is meant for this animal species.
Other species, they cannot control fish, rats, birds, insects, reptiles.
But there is one thing, one kind of energy which we are supposed to control now.
And what is that control?
People have control kingdoms.
People have control countries.
But they have not been able to control the mind.
So if somebody can control the mind, perfect yogi so well disciplined in the activities of the mind that he can no longer be disturbed by any kinds of material desire.
So, of course, it is tough.
Any path is tough.
Any kind of material enjoyment you want.
Either you have to study very hard, do very hard research, train yourself physically.
If you are an athlete or in any way, hard work is there always.
And that hard work, if guided by a proper coach person becomes successful in respective field.
But human life is meant to attain an extraordinary happiness which cannot be attained by enjoyment of all of the senses that is called the pleasure of Samadhi.
And that stage can be attained by rigorous control of the mind by fixing the mind on super self within the heart.
So this is very, very tough.
We all know how tough it is to control the mind.
That is why a mind gets disturbed by anything.
Somebody said something pretty mind will become very, very happy.
Again, agitated.
Somebody has criticized something.
Mind again becomes disturbed, something I could not attain.
I desire.
Mind becomes disturbed.
Any kind of.
So that is why I leave the place of disturbance, go to a silent place, not possible in city or village.
And then the sex desire, it disturbs the mind like anything that is a Brahmacharya.
So controlling the mind is difficult.
You have to control all the desires of the body and this practice Pranayama.
Breath should be controlled.
I should not watch anything.
All these things.
Ashtang yogi has to follow.
But.
Disperfectional stage.
Can of trans transcendence can automatically be attained by persons in Krishna consciousness as it is stated in the Shrimad Bhagavatam.
So for Krishna conscious persons, this stage comes automatically.
By engaging in regular duties, regular affairs, he need not go and leave anywhere and do anything else.
Even the hostiles, those people who are engaging in sexual affairs, they also can attain perfection.
And what does Shrimad Bhagavatam state?
These are the series of very beautiful shlokas.
So the shlokas are very, very powerful.
Prabhupada mentions.
Even if a person does not understand the meaning, simply by hearing the shlokas very nicely chanting the shlokas, person becomes advanced in spiritual life.
Mind becomes very, very purified.
So that is why towards the end of Bhagavad Gita, there is pronunciation guides.
All of you should spend some time.
You spend two, three hours in that.
You will also become very expert in reading shlokas.
You cannot read from long Devanagari things.
That is difficult for most of the people.
So from English diacritics, you can very easily read.
So if you can read, chant properly, you can hear properly.
Then there is a very nice advancement, a lot of purification of the mind.
So Shrimad Bhagavatam mentions.
Even if you do not understand the meaning, there is tremendous cleansing of mind.
And if you understand the meaning, we can meditate upon the meaning, then there is remembrance of Krishna.
So these shlokas are describing the activities of a very great king who was ruling on the planet, on this planet, which is having seven islands, Saptadvipa.
So it is already mentioned Saptadvipa, seven islands.
So people were not knowing and the geography was not so advanced.
And gradually they went, they traveled, they figured, oh, this is also an island.
That is also a place they were not able to explore the earth.
But Bhagavatam 5000 years ago, it is mentioning already that lakhs of years ago, this king was ruling on the planet, having seven islands.
And what this king was doing, he was so powerful, he was ruling on all the seven islands, seven continents.
So this king must be very busy.
Yes, he was definitely busy, but busy in what?
King Amrish first of all engaged his mind on the lotus feet of Lord Krishna.
Then one after another, he engaged his words in describing the transcendental qualities of the Lord, his hands in mopping the temple of the Lord.
So although he is king, but his hands are engaged in cleansing, cleaning the temple of the Lord, mopping the temple of the Lord.
His ears, hearing the activities of the Lord, his eyes in seeing the transcendental forms of the Lord.
His body in touching the bodies of the devotees, that bhritya, bhritya means servant, bhritya gatra sparshe ang sangamam.
His sense of smell, granam chatatpad saroj saurabhe, smelling the scents of the lotus flower offered to the Lord.
His tongue in tasting the tulsi leaf offered at the lotus feet of the Lord.
His legs in going to places of pilgrimage and the temple of the Lord.
His head in offering obeisances to the Lord and his desires in executing the mission of the Lord.
All these transcendental activities are quite befitting a pure devotee.
So people ask that Krishna, he came recently, no? So how can we tell that Krishna is God?
And you are worshipping Krishna, but before Krishna appeared, before Dwapar Yuga, whom were people worshipping?
So here you can see it is not that Krishna worship started after Dwapar Yuga.
Krishna worship was there in Satyuga also, lakhs of years before Dwapar Yuga.
That is why the word here used in Satyuga, Amrish Maharaj was meditating on Krishna padarvindayur, the lotus feet of Krishna.
Similarly, Prahalad Maharaj, who also was in Satyuga, he is telling the same word.
Krishna consciousness is not possible for these people he is describing, but he is using the word krishnamati.
So Krishna, the knowledge of Krishna was known to very exalted people.
So Krishna is an eternal personality, but he appears, he becomes visible in Dwapar Yuga and then he disappears.
There is no birth or death for Krishna.
Some people tell, no, I believe in Bhagavad Gita, but you know, nobody is beyond karma.
Krishna also had to die. He is under control of laws of karma.
Foolish people don't read Bhagavad Gita. Krishna is telling.
I am not entangled by karma.
I don't want the results of my karmas also.
One who understands this fact about me that I am not controlled by any laws, I am the controller of laws.
He is also free from all the laws.
He becomes free completely from the control of entire material nature, all the forces.
So Krishna is an eternal personality.
Some people tell, no, no, Vedas don't mention. This is from Bhagavatam. This is Puran.
There is no difference between Veda. Puranas are explanations of Vedic principles only.
However, in Vedas also, Krishna is mentioned.
Just like this Hare Krishna Mahamantra, it is from Yajur Veda, Krishna Yajur Veda.
It is from Upanishad, Kali Santaran Upanishad.
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare.
So again Krishna word is coming.
And it is mentioned in so many, all the Vedas it is mentioned.
But yes, it is a fact. Krishna's name is mentioned less.
It does not mean that Krishna is not supreme.
Just like basic mathematics, one plus one tables, two is a two, two to the four.
It is so many books you will find because every child has to undergo this education.
But higher mathematics, Newton Leibniz theorem, not many people would read, not many books on that.
And as you go higher, the publication reduces.
Some books of mathematics only you will find in ISC, MIT or IITs.
Not every person will go through them.
So those books will be very, very less. Those theorems very less people would have heard.
It does not mean that theorem is less important, rather it is most important.
So the confidential things are very less mentioned.
That is why it is told Vedeshudur labham.
Krishna is difficult to be found in the Vedas because not everyone can understand Krishna.
So Krishna is mentioned in the Vedas, but less. Vishnu is easily mentioned.
Understanding of Vishnu is relatively easy, who is also another form of expansion of Krishna.
But the original form is not known.
However, we see even in Satyuga, the devotees know the eternality of Krishna.
And thus Amrish Maharaj was meditating on the lotus feet of Krishna.
So this transcendental stage may be inexpressible subjectively by the followers of impersonalist path.
But it becomes very easy and practical for a person in Krishna consciousness
as is apparent in the above description of the engagements of Maharaj Amrish.
So if you ask a yogi impersonalist who has no proper understanding of form of God,
then it will be very difficult for him to describe this stage of samadhi, to express what is this samadhi.
However, a personalist can very easily describe what is samadhi.
When mind is engaged, mind is always engaged in thinking of the lotus feet of Krishna.
So a Krishna conscious devotee is absorbed in a different samadhi.
So samadhi means when a person's mind is completely fixed upon Krishna.
So mind can be fixed in two ways. There are impersonalist and personalist.
Both of them reach samadhi.
An impersonalist samadhi is not very perfect because he is so much disturbed.
Just like if somebody tells you, you have to focus on this point.
We have to focus on reading something.
Then we have to avoid all disturbances.
We have to shut the doors and windows. Sometimes the sound is very loud.
We have to put off our phones.
There is disturbance. Avoid all kinds of disturbances.
Then a person can focus very nicely.
Body has to be fit. Mind has to be cool, calm.
Then a person can focus on a subject matter.
But when there is, let's say we are watching some movie, we are watching some cricket match.
So there is no need of shutting down other things.
Person is automatically captured by that.
Automatically in samadhi.
Why? Because there is taste for that.
So when there is taste for something, automatically focusing on that thing becomes easy.
So a person has to leave everything and go to jungle and sit down there.
Follow tapasah, brahmacharyana and all the difficult things.
When he has no love and attraction for Krishna.
So that is why he has to control his breath also.
He has to become perfectly free from all diseases.
That is why he does pranayam. He does asanas.
Body should be completely free from diseases.
Mind should be very very peaceful.
So he has to adjust all the external things.
I should not watch anything. Even eating should be stopped.
I should not move also.
Because if I move, I walk, mind becomes disturbed.
Sit down, keep on sitting for many many thousands of years.
In that way he reaches samadhi.
And there is little disturbance sometimes.
As Vishwamitra Samapsara came and then finished after that.
But then a devotee, devotee is following the advanced process of samadhi.
He learns the art of developing attachment to Krishna.
So we have understood samadhi means in the previous shlokas we saw.
Meditating upon Krishna.
And the aim of samadhi is to attain the sanstha not to merge into Krishna.
To attain to the kingdom of Krishna.
To go to the spiritual world.
So focusing on Krishna is samadhi.
Now to attain this a person can without love try to see the form of Krishna within the heart.
So because there is no love a person has to avoid all the external disturbances so that he can focus.
But a devotee simply by always chanting about Krishna.
Simply by engaging his senses in the service of Krishna.
He is very easily able to fix his mind always upon Krishna.
And this is very easy practice to attain the stage of samadhi.
But however this process is not easy.
Finding such a spiritual master a coach who can train the disciple in such process is not very easy.
But if somebody can do that it is very very simple.
And a person because he develops attraction for Krishna.
Even though there is disease in the body.
Even though there is some disturbance in the mind or the surroundings are not good.
A person can still remain always in samadhi.
But as it is highlighted here.
Unless the mind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Lord by constant remembrance.
Such transcendental engagements are not practical.
So the mind has to be fixed in the lotus feet of Krishna.
In the devotional service of the Lord therefore these prescribed activities are called archana.
Or engaging all the senses in the service of the Lord.
The senses and the mind require engagements.
Simply abnegation or stopping the activities is not practical.
Therefore for people in general especially those who are not in the renounced order of life.
Not everyone can take sannyas.
Kalyuga especially it is prohibited.
So transcendental engagement of the senses and mind as described above.
Is the perfect process for transcendental achievement.
Which is called yukta in the Bhagavad Gita.
So therefore in Kalyuga especially.
And when this yoga process which is being described here is not practical.
A person has to engage himself in same activities what Maharaj Amrish was doing.
The king of the whole world.
Granam chatatpada saroj saurabhe.
He'll offer flowers to the lotus feet of Krishna.
And then his sense of smell is engaged in smelling those flowers.
Need not control the senses artificially.
You want to smell various scents.
You smell the scent of the flowers offered to lotus feet of Krishna.
You want to see various things.
See the form of Krishna.
You want to eat something tasty.
Offer the food which is offered to Krishna.
You want to go to various places.
Want to see new places.
Go to dham.
The place where Krishna lives.
Use your legs.
Harekshetra padhanu sarpanay.
You use your legs to reach Harekshetra.
The temples of the lord or the transcendental dham.
Where lord has done his pastimes.
So in this way all the activities of the senses should be followed.
Arjuna means deity worship.
Is very much required for this age.
And specially for the householders where contamination is great.
So when we install a deity in our house.
So simply by this deity worship a person can very easily reach this stage of samadhi.
Constant remembrance in the lotus feet of Krishna.
And then what happens?
As a lamp in a windless place does not waver.
So the transcendentalist whose mind is controlled.
Remains always steady in his meditation on the transcendent self.
Lamp in a windless place will not shake.
Similarly yoga means not sometimes thinking of Krishna.
And sometimes I am thinking of some other thing.
No.
Always remains steady in his meditation on transcendent self.
So meditation lasting for 2 hours, 3 hours.
Such a person can not be said to be in samadhi.
Samadhi means 24 hours when there is unbroken meditation.
That is called samadhi.
So perfect yogi means even for a moment.
He will not forget the lotus feet of Krishna.
Samadhi means 24 hours when there is unbroken meditation.
That is called samadhi.
So perfect yogi means even for a moment.
He will not forget the lotus feet of Krishna.
That is called samadhi.
And then what happens?
So we all want.
We all want freedom from the misery which is coming from material contact.
We want to solve the problems of life.
So when a person can solve the problems of life, this is the solution.
The miseries of life cannot be solved by doing any kind of material achievement,
but by following this process.
What is the process?
By reaching the stage of trance, samadhi.
The stage of perfection is called trance or samadhi.
When one's mind is completely restrained from material mental activities by practice of yoga.
This is characterized by one's ability to see the self by the pure mind
and able to relish and rejoice in the self.
So a person will be able to see the self.
Now we are theoretically understanding that I am not the body,
but a person will be able to see the self and the super self, soul and the super soul.
We will be able to see our self.
In that joyous state, one is situated in boundless, transcendental happiness
and enjoys himself through transcendental senses.
Established thus one never departs from the truth
and upon gaining this he thinks there is no greater gain.
Being situated in such a position, one is never shaken.
Even in the midst of greatest difficulty,
this indeed is actual freedom from all miseries arising from material contact.
So this is the technology we have to learn.
This is the discipline we have to learn.
We have to regulate our mind,
mental activities under proper guidance of an expert, pure devotee, spiritual master.
And by that guidance, when the mind intelligence is cleansed,
a person can see his own self and then see the super self, Krishna,
and reach a joyous state of unbounded, transcendental happiness.
And a person enjoys through transcendental senses.
It is not that, oh, this is very boring, simply zero state.
No, it is not zero state.
There is positive pleasure, but through spiritual senses, not through these material senses.
And unless a person reaches this platform, he can any time forget the truth.
But once a person reaches samadhi, then one never departs from truth.
And upon gaining this, he thinks there is no greater gain in life.
Here, whatever we gain in the material world, we think, oh, something is missing.
What is missing? What should I do next?
I should earn more money or I should do charity, give up all my money.
But when a person attains this stage, he thinks there is no greater gain in life.
Being situated in such a position, one is never shaken, even in the midst of greatest difficulty.
This indeed is actual freedom.
Then, even though there may be very great difficulty in life,
there could be accident, death of a dear relative, dear most person or anything.
A person is never going to be shaken.
Just like Maharaj Amri's description is there in Bhagavatam.
Although he was having so much opulence and so much opulence blocks usually the process of spiritual advancement,
person starts enjoying here the temporary facilities.
But he was not disturbed at all. Why?
Because he was understanding as a dream-like situation.
So a yogi perfectly understands this material world as a temporary situation, dream-like situation.
So he is not disturbed. Calamities temporary, success is temporary.
I will continue taking birth and death so that is why I should focus on stopping this perpetual death, disease and old age.
And this happiness and distress, it comes and goes. I should not bother about it.
And he is relishing such high-grade unlimited happiness that he is never shaken, whatever difficulty can occur in life.
So this is the solution of all miseries arising from material contact.
So human life, that is why it is meant for attaining this stage of samadhi, then the success.
There is no other purpose of human life but to attain this platform.
So Arjuna was in difficulty and he was thinking if I do not fight this war, I'll become happy.
If I can save my relatives, I'll be happy.
So Krishna told Arjuna, please do not think anything will make you happy.
But only by reaching the stage of samadhi, you can be completely happy.
So how we can do this, reach the stage of samadhi?
So the process of Arjuna, deity worship is important.
But even to reach samadhi by doing deity worship, it is not possible in Kali Yuga.
So deity worship is required but then ultimately what will take us to samadhi?
So Prabhupada mentions in this purport also it is little long so you can read on your own.
So I will explain in short.
So very beautiful two shlokas Prabhupada mentions, two explanations Prabhupada mentions.
So please hear very very carefully, very very carefully.
So now we are going to discuss a very practical thing which is recommended in the Vedas to reach samadhi.
Even a neophyte who is not at all trained, whose senses are very loose and hopeless situation, he also can attain perfection.
How we can do this? Please hear carefully.
This is from Nectar of Instruction, text 8, purport.
So I recommended all of you to read Nectar of Instruction. I hope you would have read.
And please hear this carefully. It's from text 8.
In the neophyte state, one should always engage in hearing krishna katha.
Neophyte means beginning stages.
One should always engage in hearing krishna katha.
This is called shravanadasha, the stage of hearing.
So this is the first stage. A person hears, hears, hears constantly as much as possible.
So whenever possible, not that only Wednesday, Saturday or in the evening bhakti vraksha sessions.
I should discuss Bhagavad Gita.
Apart from the evening time of sessions and RDV discussions, as far as possible you are doing any work, any activity.
Now we are all at home. We are cleaning the house. We are doing the dishes.
We are ironing the clothes. We are doing anything x, y, z.
If it is possible, play Prabhupada's lecture and keep on doing your activities.
Or just like people get up to smoke in between the work, get up and hear five minutes lecture.
So throughout the day, as much as possible, we should try to hear, hear, hear.
This is called hearing stage.
By constantly hearing the transcendental holy name of Krishna
and hearing of his transcendental form, qualities and pastimes,
one can attain to the stage of acceptance called varanadasha.
So initially when we hear, there are so many doubts.
Doubts are there because piety is not there. Sinful activities of the past life, they create doubt.
So when we become pious by hearing, hearing, hearing constantly.
So hearing constantly the signs of Krishna, Krishna's pastime is not possible.
Krishna's name is possible. That is also not different.
So whatever work we are doing, if we can practice while working on the computer,
I can be chanting and hearing also, just like people keep on singing song
or keep on hearing song in the right exams also by hearing songs.
They are able to read only when they are listening songs.
This is the practice that materialists do.
So we can have such practice that by constantly chanting Hare Krishna mantra,
I can do my work also. Then that is very nice.
So by constantly chanting what happens of the name of Krishna,
pastimes of Krishna, form activities of Krishna,
one attains to the stage of acceptance called varanadasha.
So varanadasha, varan means then acceptance comes.
Then the intelligence clears up, the senses become controlled
and then the person is able to accept, oh yes, this is fact.
I am able to understand now.
So this faith, this logic to develop spiritual logics takes time.
How much a person is applying himself to constant hearing,
it depends in that proportion he will advance to varanadasha.
When one attains this stage, he becomes attached to the hearing of Krishna katha.
Then voluntarily would be waiting, oh when can I hear more?
As soon as there is opportunity, we would like to hear varanadasha.
Person becomes attached.
When one is able to chant in ecstasy,
then when a person is attached, then slowly he will reach ecstasy.
When one is able to chant in ecstasy,
he attains the stage of smaranavastha, the stage of remembering.
So we have to remember Krishna always, we have seen here.
This is the most confidential part of yoga.
Man-mana, bhav-mad-bhakto, constant thinking, remembrance of Krishna.
But how this remembrance will come?
It is by constantly hearing, hearing, hearing, hearing, hearing.
Then remembrance will come.
When a person is able to get ecstasy,
unless a person is feeling ecstatic while chanting,
remembrance is not possible.
Artificially a person tries to focus on Krishna, think on Krishna,
he or she will not be able to continue.
So by constantly chanting, hearing, chanting, hearing, what happens?
When one is able to chant in ecstasy,
he attains the stage of smaranavastha.
All this happens automatically.
The stage of remembering.
Recollection, absorption, meditation, constant remembrance and trance,
what we have seen here,
are five items of progressive krishna smaran.
So krishna smaran, the remembrance also has five items.
At first, remembrance of Krishna may be interrupted at intervals.
So you are remembering, you forget.
Then you remember, then you forget Krishna.
But later, remembrance proceeds uninterrupted.
When remembrance is uninterrupted, it becomes concentrated.
And it's called meditation.
Sometimes you are thinking of something,
and sometimes you are lost in thinking of that thing.
So it becomes concentrated, the remembrance.
And that is called meditation.
Concentrated remembrance of anything, of Krishna, is called meditation.
And when meditation expands,
means you are not just thinking,
but concentrated thinking, moment after moment,
that is called expansion of meditation.
When meditation expands and becomes constant,
it is called anusmriti.
So all these technical stages are explained.
By uninterrupted and unceasing anusmriti,
one enters the stage of samadhi or spiritual trance.
So by uninterrupted, unceasing anusmriti, constant remembrance,
one enters the stage of samadhi or spiritual trance,
after smaran dasha or samadhi has fully developed.
So when samadhi has fully developed,
the soul comes to understand its original constitutional position.
At that time, he can perfectly and clearly understand
his eternal relationship with Krishna,
that is called sampatti dasha, the perfection of life.
So when we will fully understand our position,
there is no technical way to prove that you are soul,
part and parcel of Krishna, living within this body.
Just like a sleeping man in a dream cannot technically prove
that this dream is a dream and he doesn't belong to that world.
He has to wake up only.
So we have to wake up by hearing, hearing, hearing.
Constantly alarm is there, then a person wakes up.
So we have to practice that.
That is why satatam kirtayan.
So mam always keep on chanting, hearing, chanting, hearing.
And by this chanting and hearing, automatically,
logic will become clear, mind will become clear,
varan dasha will come.
And by that, if a person continues,
then he enters into smrana vastha.
He becomes, he is able to chant in ecstasy
and he is able to remember Krishna.
And this remembrance increases, the interruptions are gone.
It becomes concentrated meditation.
And when the meditation expands, it is called anusmriti.
When anusmriti expands, unceasing anusmriti, that is called samadhi.
When a samadhi is fully developed,
then a person is able to understand his position.
So people think mukti or samadhi,
it means going and merging in Krishna.
No.
So Bhagavatam describes mukti hitva anyatha roopena swaroopena vyavasthiti.
Mukti hitva, hitva means to give up.
Anyatha roopena.
Mukti means to give up your material designations.
Swaroopena vyavasthiti.
And be established in your own identity,
the soul as identity, name, form and relation with Krishna.
So swaroopena, become established, revive your original position.
That is called mukti, not going and merging somewhere.
This is described in Patanjali Yoga Sutra also.
So we should give up this concept.
What misconception is there in the society?
Mukti means going and merging somewhere.
That is very basic mukti and that is not at all real mukti.
So that is why in Patanjali Yoga Sutra also it is described.
You can read the purport how Patanjali is also describing.
So this knowledge of our constitutional position that is actually called mukti.
So we can attain this stage by doing deity worship and along with deity worship,
deity worship enhances the process of cleansing of mind, enhances our chanting.
But it is a chanting process that will take us to this stage of trance.
So that is why Arjuna rejects this process here.
And then Krishnadas don't worry.
You are already always engaged in my remembrance.
So you are the best of all, best of all yogis.
So that is why please don't think this chanting hearing is an ordinary thing.
Just keep on chanting hearing always constantly with great attention.
And then we will attain all these stages successfully.
We will get attached to chanting, we will get ecstasy, remembrance,
and then we should aspire to reach samadhi and develop our position.
So human life is meant to attain this platform.
And then we experience the happiness which we have never experienced by watching anything,
hearing anything, tasting anything, touching anything, ati indriya which is beyond the senses.
