yunjanevam sadātmānam yogi-vigatakalmaśaḥ
sukhena brahm sansparsham atyantam sukha-maśnute
Study in the Self, being freed from all material contamination,
the yogi achieves the highest perfectional stage of happiness in touch with the Supreme Consciousness.
Purport
Srila Prabhupada explains,
Self-realization means knowing one's constitutional position in relationship to the Supreme.
The individual soul is part and parcel of the Supreme,
and his position is to render transcendental service to the Lord.
This transcendental contact with the Supreme is called brahm sansparsha.
So Lord Krishna explained to Arjuna the way to attain perfection of yoga,
and what is the situation when a yogi attains that unlimited happiness.
And we discussed in the previous session, in order to attain that situation,
which is called samadhi, of great happiness,
we have to very very strictly follow the six principles.
Utsahat nishchaya dhairya tat tat karma pravartanat sangh tyaga sato vratte sadhbir bhakti prasidhyati
A person should be very enthusiastic first of all,
just like materialist is enthusiastic to make money in his life.
Similarly, the devotee is very very enthusiastic for spiritual advancement.
Yes, I want a progressive and advanced stage of spiritual realization.
Unless the desire is there to advance, advancement would be very very slow.
So great enthusiasm. Yes, I want this platform.
That is why Krishna explained.
He is explaining the consciousness, the vision of the devotee,
so that we become eager. Yes, I want to develop this.
And along with enthusiasm, many people are enthusiastic to do something.
Whenever there is an announcement of some guitar classes,
people would purchase guitar and go and after a couple of weeks they give up.
Karate classes. Yes, 100 people would register and four would remain.
So there is a lot of enthusiasm in the beginning.
They are all enthusiastic to learn.
But then there is no determination.
So it appears very tough.
Many obstacles become so people are not able to keep up their enthusiasm.
They lose determination.
And the main thing which is responsible for poor determination is not following Brahmacharya.
So that is why Prabhupada tells Brahmacharya if he decides something, he can execute.
But because people are lacking in Brahmacharya, so determination has become very very poor.
So a devotee should be very very determined.
The example of determination was given like that of a sparrow.
Spiritual advancement is actually an impossible task.
And it takes many many births to complete.
However, this Krishna Consciousness is so powerful that within one life it can be made perfect.
Still there would be obstacles.
So a person should be very very determined, not get deterred by any of the obstacles.
And he should be very very confident because I am following the perfect path
charted out by the authorities of Self-realization given by Lord Krishna himself.
People have implemented in their life all these obstacles.
So success is sure.
So with this confidence, with determination, he should try to maintain his enthusiasm.
And there are patients should be there on the next day of marriage.
The birth of child cannot be expected.
So a few months wait is required in a similar fashion.
Even though we are perfectly implementing the things, time is required.
And we may fail also initially, so patient should be there.
Perseverance is also important.
It is natural.
We cannot expect to I'm not advancing.
I have been falling.
No, the process is perfect.
So we simply have to wait and not get very much disturbed by the setbacks which we can and we will encounter in our spiritual life.
And follow all the rules and regulations, keeping these three things in mind.
We keep on persevering in following the rules and regulations with great determination, even though few rules can be tough at times.
And one should be very enthusiastic.
Oh, even though life of materialist is so tough, but how much enthusiastic they are.
Yes, I want to attain.
I will become rich.
I will become rich.
But how much enthusiastic they are.
Yes, I want to attain.
I will become rich.
I will become this and that in a similar fashion.
This enthusiasm should always be maintained and follow rules and regulations.
These rules and regulations should be followed, not in isolation, but in association of devotees.
So the devotional service, spiritual life becomes mature and relishable only in the association of devotees.
So the spiritual processes are very, very difficult and full of tapasya.
But this Krishna consciousness, this most confidential knowledge is very, very pleasant to perform.
However, this pleasant experience, this relish is awakened only in the association of devotees.
Unless we live with devotees, Krishna consciousness will not be very relishable.
So that is why it is told sangh tyagaat.
One should leave the association of materialist.
So association is required, either that of materialist or of spiritualist.
So we should live in the association of spiritualist.
That is very easy way of avoiding material association.
And sato vratte hai, have a lifestyle which is very satvik in nature.
Sato vratte hai.
And then a person advances very fast in spiritual life.
So then what happens when a person is following the yogic rules with these principles in mind,
with great determination, mind fixed upon Krishna.
So this word is very important here.
Atyantam sukham.
Atyant means extreme, atyantam, extreme happiness, ashrinute attains.
So once a reporter asked Srila Prabhupada,
the question which many people, they ask the spiritualists,
that Srila Prabhupada, what is the aim of life?
So when we hear this question, any guesses what Prabhupada would have replied?
Can you please type in the chat box?
So let's see if somebody can figure out or not what Prabhupada would have replied.
When Prabhupada was asked, please tell me what is the aim of life?
Oh yes, all of you have guessed, I think.
Okay, a few people are new.
To be in Krishna consciousness, self-realization, become servant, to be servant of Krishna,
realize the self in relation to Krishna, to go back to home, self-realization,
to realize God, yes.
To remain in Krishna consciousness, to become an atom at the lotus feet of Krishna,
self-realization, to become happy, self-realization.
Yes, so you have given, thank you so much for the answers.
To remember Narayan at the time of death.
Yes, so we can expect all such answers, which are there in majority.
However, some devotees have given the right answer, who know this conversation.
So Prabhupada told, yes, this is the general expectation,
going back home, back to Godhead, to always remain in Krishna consciousness,
is the aim of life, stop the cycle of repeated birth, death, old age and disease,
and to attain moksha, some people have written.
And all these things Prabhupada has explained, and this is fact also.
However, in this particular conversation, Srila Prabhupada told,
the aim of life is to enjoy.
So ultimately, why back to Godhead is required?
Why Krishna is calling the devotees, people come back to me?
Krishna has lack of employees, he wants to engage us in his company.
And why freedom from birth, death, old age and disease is required?
Why self-realization is required?
Because a living entity is Anandmayo Abhyasat.
Vedanta Sutra says, living entity is seeking happiness.
So the difference between materialist and spiritualist is,
both want happiness, but the malady of a materialist is,
he does not know how to become happy.
Why he does not know? Because he is ignorant.
An ignorant person does not know, just like a child,
he is hungry, he will put anything in the mouth.
And then sometimes there are, he may eat some poison,
some naphthalene balls, and then vomiting, and at times death also happens.
They will put everything.
Just like poor cows, we have our Goshala in Jaipur.
So that's a cow rehabilitation center, the biggest in Asia.
We have around 25,000 cows, if I am not wrong.
And the cows come there in pathetic situation.
And we have ICU for cows and hospital for cows, many surgeons.
So the cows, they do not know what is good for them,
whatever is there, they eat it, polythene sometimes,
15-20 kg of polythene is there, the entire stomach is stuffed with polythene.
And now there is no hunger because the stomach is already full.
And they die in this way because of starvation.
So many, many kilograms of polythene is taken out by operating the cows.
So cow is ignorant, does not know what is good for me, bad for me,
whatever is there, and it eats directly.
In a similar fashion, a materialist does not know what is good for them,
what is good for them, what is good for them,
what is good for them, what is good for them,
but a yogi knows how to become happy.
And what kind of happiness yogi enjoys?
Flickering happiness like a materialist, few minutes of happiness
for enjoying few minutes or few hours on the weekend,
he will work entire week very, very rigorously.
So does it make any sense that a yogi does not know
what is good for him, what is good for him,
what is good for him, what is good for him,
what is good for him, what is good for him,
he will work entire week very, very rigorously.
So does it make any sense?
Atyantam sukham ashnute.
Atyant means extreme happiness, highest happiness
is attained by the yogis.
However,
we have to understand why the materialist
or the people in general,
we are not able to enjoy that happiness.
So that also Lord Krishna is mentioning here
because yogi is vighat kalma shaha,
yogi is free from kalmash.
Kalmash means material contamination.
It is a contamination of three modes of nature,
which is a cause of all miseries.
Because of these three modes, living entity comes in hallucination
and thinks that I am this body.
And it gets bhavaroga. Bhavaroga means bodily concept of life.
That is why everything keeps on changing bodies.
So because we are in disease situation,
tapasya is required.
And by tapasya we purify ourselves and after purification,
when we are free from all this kalmash,
we will be able to enjoy life, become happy.
So the materialist may think,
oh, I know how to become happy just by fixing
my financial problem,
because I am so lazy and people spend entire time
in this thing. No, sir, it is not going to make you happy.
Everything is under control of God.
So it is not by chance that somebody is suffering
and somebody is enjoying.
Why somebody has got this kalmash, material contamination?
Because he has broken some laws of nature, as simple as that.
Material nature acts when a person
breaks the law of nature, just like the police.
The example is given in the scriptures.
The police will not catch a person,
will not even touch a person,
if he has not broken the laws.
And even though police person can be standing next to us,
we are not scared, but a person who is a thief,
he needs to be scared and police is going to catch him sooner or later.
In a similar fashion, the material energy,
Durga, Devi, Maya, does not touch a person,
harm a person who has not broken the laws of Krishna.
But as soon as a person breaks the laws of nature,
immediately material energy starts acting, kalmash.
He gets contaminated.
So why this contamination is acting upon us?
We are affected by the kalmash
because we have broken some laws of nature in the past.
So this concept should be very, very clear.
This is the fundamental concept.
So that is why these Jigyasa sessions are very important.
So we discuss why we are suffering.
We are suffering only because we have broken the laws of nature
and nothing else.
That is called vikarma, breaking the laws of nature.
Now whatever we do, that suffering is going to come to us.
So the devotees spoke to the Ayurvedic doctor.
So the doctor told clearly,
yes, I can give you medicine,
but this medicine will act only if it is there in your karma.
If it is not there in your karma, then whatever you try,
medicine is not going to act.
So this is the law.
So that is why rather than thinking, oh, let me fix some problems of my life
and then I'll pick up Krishna Consciousness,
we have to understand Krishna Consciousness is the solution.
Once if we have committed crime, come what may,
we will not be allowed freedom from the resulting kalmash.
So there is only one solution.
And what is that solution?
So if somebody has not understood this thing,
means he has not understood Bhagavad Gita.
If anybody reads Bhagavad Gita and he has understood sincerely,
he should quickly come to this conclusion.
And what is the conclusion? Krishna declares also.
See, Arjun, this is the conclusion of Bhagavad Gita.
Now hear that I have spoken so much of knowledge in Bhagavad Gita.
Now hear the most confidential, most secret part of it.
And what is that?
To become free from sins,
we see how Krishna is recommending such tough procedures.
You go to jungle.
You go to jungle.
You go to jungle.
You go to jungle.
You go to jungle.
You go to jungle, sit like this.
And for thousands of years you keep on sitting,
control the senses, do not eat, do not talk, do not walk.
And so difficult it is.
And like this other process is also which Krishna has mentioned,
so these are so tough, control always all the senses on all sides.
And after explaining all these things, Krishna is telling Arjuna,
now I am telling you
secret knowledge. Simply think of me always. Become my devotee. Worship me. Offer your
respects unto me. Forget all the duties and all the religions which are only stepping
stone for the ultimate religion. What is ultimate religion? Yamraj has defined. Yamraj is the
controller is the ultimate controller deciding personality who awards punishment to all the
he's like the judge for all the souls so he knows he has got the perfect knowledge of religion so
he's telling that the perfection of religion is in this world the top most Dharma so Dharma is
just like school different dharmas are given to the living entities. Shudra Dharma very basic
duties would be given. You need not follow sannyas very tough you cannot follow you need not follow
vanaprastha you cannot live in jungle with your wife cannot go follow this thing cannot remain
brahmachari also just remain grahastha follow those basic rules and regulations and just remain
faithful to your employer that is shudra dharma then more than that little tough is vaishya dharma
kshatriya dharma brahmana dharma matra dharma petra so many dharmas are there and a person is
supposed to follow but all these dharmas are stepping stone to the ultimate dharma. What is
ultimate dharma? Yamraj is telling. The top most dharma is bhakti yoga. Bhagavati unto the
supreme personality of Godhead and how that bhakti yoga starts the top most dharma starts
tan naam grahan adibi naam grahan by chanting and hearing the names of the supreme personality
of Godhead the supreme religion is this it begins with this chanting hearing etc the details are
mentioned in other shlokas of bhagavatam shravanam kirtanam vishnu ho smaranam padasevanam so
ultimately everything is meant to take a living entity to this top most dharma that is complete
surrender into supreme personality of Godhead so unless we surrender completely we come to a
platform where I agree yes Krishna now have no independent desire I have no my independent plans
I completely surrender unto your plan please tell me how can I engage in your service when a living
entity offers his independence sarva dharmaan parityajya for getting all other dharmas leaving
all dharmas aside maam ekam he just take shelter of Krishna nothing else then that is called that
is the crux the conclusion the most confidential knowledge of Bhagavad-gita then Krishna is telling
aham tvam sarva pape bhyo moksha ishyami you need not strive basis your physical mental capacity of
doing yoga asana tapasya etc aham tvam sarva pape bhyo I will relieve you I will square it up settle
all the bad karmas that you have in the past sarva pape bhyo moksha ishyami so that is if you
want to become free it does not take very long time prabhupada explains just surrender completely
to Krishna and immediately that moment onwards Krishna relieves the devotee of the effects of
past vikarmas the sinful activities moksha ishyami mashuja do not worry Krishna guarantees I will do
that you please surrender to me so if you want to become happy this is the solution of becoming
happy rather than endeavoring here and there and thinking one day I'll follow Krishna consciousness
perfectly let me completely surrender to Krishna and all those who have this is called science
science means observation and experimentation many people have experimented this and the
result is there as soon as you surrender to Krishna atyantam sukham person becomes relieved
and this sukha is revealed
so even this thing could be difficult
because the faith is not easy in Krishna consciousness in understanding Krishna that
he is God and I should surrender so that is why to have clarity in life unless there is
very strong effect of sinful activities because of this effect clarity is not there always
confusion is there so that is why Chaitanya maha prabhu has given very simple process
so kena brahm sparsham the yogi is always enjoying this happiness by getting freedom
from kalma why because brahm was some sparsham he lost he's always in contact with brahm
he's always maintaining constant touch with God transcendental contact with God so contacting
God God is supremely pure if we contact God we also become pure so the yogi by maintaining
constant touch with Krishna enjoys this happiness so even though we may not enjoy immediately by
contacting God because of being paralyzed by this material nature a person having paralysis
does not feel the touch similarly we also by chanting by engaging in chanting and hearing
immediately may not feel pleasure it may take some time to the extent we are purified
to that degree we will get ecstasy while chanting while engaging in devotional service
so even though we may we are not getting that ecstasy still we are getting purified
so the medicine is acting even though the relish is not awakened immediately
so in order to get clarity that Krishna is God and eventually surrender to God this simple
process Chaitanya maha prabhu has given so if you cannot surrender immediately no problem just
chant and hear the names of Krishna but that we should try to do offenselessly for quick
purification as I had shared in the telegram channel yesterday this very important quote is
there Prabhupada tells many faults can be there we can commit many mistakes however chanting we
should try to do offenselessly Ajamil committed many many mistakes he was looting people he was
engaged in gambling and killing people and breaking all the regulative principles however he was able
to chant offenselessly the name of Krishna so this we should try then purification is there
so every day the minimum rounds that we chant that should be offenseless rounds so by this we
can maintain touch with Krishna and how we have to maintain touch constant touch we have to maintain
so by constant touch with Krishna by always chanting and hearing his names the devotee
is getting purified and when he's sufficiently purified the devotee surrenders completely to
Krishna and he is freed from all the past sinful activities then material nature does not affect
a devotee and then he gets great happiness and then what happens to such a surrendered soul
who is enjoying Brahma samsparsham
a true yogi observes me in all beings and also sees every being in me indeed the self-realized man
sees me everywhere
so how we see the world defines whether we are going to enjoy or suffer it all depends upon
one's vision the same person can be object of happiness for somebody can be object of distress
for somebody can be object of love or envy hatred or lust the same person will generate
different feelings to different people depending upon what vision they are carrying for that person
and for some it may just be a food a tiger may see a man oh immediately he would want to eat
so it depends what is your vision about that person or about anything so that is why
uh a yogi does not need to go anywhere else to become happy
here that is the beauty of krishna consciousness simply by changing the vision the devotee becomes
very very happy so what is the vision of a pure devotee or a perfect yogi that is mentioned here
now so the development is in different stages in the first stage yes uh the vision of lord is very
very important however when a person is very very new in the spiritual practices he is a new fight
in the bhakti yoga system then that is called kanistha adhikari and the vision of kanistha adhikari
he sees the lord my lord is there sitting in the temple and with great respect
and great diligence regularity he is worshipping the lord in the temple however he is not able to
have this vision what is the vision krishna is defining of perfect yogi true yogi observes me
in all beings and also sees every being in me indeed the self-realized man sees me everywhere
this neophyte devotee is not able to see that krishna is present everywhere for him krishna
is present only in the temple for materialist krishna is not present anywhere but a devotee
neophyte devotee knows yes god is there but my god is there in the temple and when the devotee
advances further and but this neophyte stage is also very high as we have learned before
this is brahmana platform the highest platform of material world is the beginning of devotional
service bhakti yoga who is having perfect control of mind perfect control on senses speech he is
very very clean inside and outside he is very very forgiving perfectly truthful he who understands
that i am not this body who has great clarity and strong faith in the vedas he is called a
neophyte brahmana and he is very very rigorously very very punctual in deity worship but he does
not understand the value of other devotees who does not understand the value of other devotees
but gives respect only to god in the temple such a devotee is called neophyte and his spiritual
life is very uncertain it can stop anytime very risky position we all start in that position that
is where many people begin this process but and they take interest also but they are not able to
continue and then the devotee advances to second level that is madhyam adhikari then very clearly
he understands what is god and who is a devotee offers proper respect to different categories of
devotees he is able to categorize also he is able to judge oh this is very high devotee high class
of devotee this is new devotee and accordingly he offers respect to some devotees he offers respect
just in the mind to some devotees he physically offers respects the initiated devotees and other
devotees who are very very advanced with them adhikari he engages in their service surrenders
completely unto those devotees and then he understands who is god very clearly he will
not take any person claiming the time incarnation and start worshipping him as god but he understands
very very clearly and then a devotee advances further beyond that platform to the highest
platform that is called uttam adhikari and that vision is described here a true yogi observes me
in all beings and also sees every being in me indeed the self-realized man sees me everywhere
shri prabhupad gives very beautiful explanation a krishna conscious yogi is the perfect seer
because he sees krishna the supreme situated in everyone's heart as super soul parmatma
so who is a perfect seer who can see who is residing within the heart
if we see a big truck and we see oh a big man is coming if we see a small vehicle we see small
man is coming then that is ignorance but a person knows the driver is the same man is the same in
all the vehicles so a person who actually is called actual seer who can see who is residing
within the machines which is krishna everywhere the lord in his parmatma feature is situated
within both the heart of the dog and that of a brahmana however the perfect yogi knows that the
lord is eternally transcendental and is not materially affected by his presence in either a
dog or a brahmana so one devotee asked question to one of the senior devotees and she was telling
that oh prabhu i am feeling very bad that lord is suffering parmatma is suffering so much
that parmatma is living in the heart of a pig and the pig is living in drain and parmatma has
to live in drain this thing is paining me so lord is yes lord is seated there in the heart of a pig
who is in the drain but the lord is not in the drain our lord is not suffering the impurities
the blood and the flesh of the heart lord is there situated in the heart but he's transcendental
he's not affected by the dirt although he's situated in that dirty place this is called
transcendental situation in a different dimension and similar is the situation of a devotee also
a pure devotee also comes in this world but he's completely unaffected by
whatever is happening around him so this stage is very very high this is called paramhansa stage
so this is the platform of the pure devotees so they are not at all affected through
so all these are transcendental devotees although they are here they are not at all affected
so this is called real vision of yogi the yogi is not disturbed oh krishna is living and suffering
in the heart of a dog no he's transcendentally situated that is the supreme neutrality of the
lord the individual soul is also situated in the individual heart but he is not present in all the
hearts that is the distinction between individual soul and the super soul one who is not factual in
the practice of yoga cannot see so clearly so however a person who is not situated who has
not done yoga nicely he cannot see super soul in the heart that's one condition of the yogi which
is being recommended in this chapter is yogi should be fearless so how somebody can be fearless a yogi
supposed to live in jungle the ashtanga yogi jungle is very dark and all kinds of animals are there
insects are there snakes are there how somebody can be fearless how can he even sleep in such a
situation no he's fearless because he's seeing super soul just like a friend is there next to us
so then we will not be fearful in a similar fashion he sees my supreme friend and was supremely
powerful everything is under his control he's there with me so that is why he's not at all fearless
so only when a person can attain such a platform he's allowed to take sannyas that is why sannyas
is only meant for brahmanas in the advanced stage sannyas is not recommended for a kshatriya or a
vaishya or a sudra so just like only a person who has who is graduate he is allowed to go for
postgraduate otherwise it is not allowed only so that is why in some religions they tell oh
deity worship should not be done should not be done that if for you it should not be done
because you are just learning the basics yes for you it is banned you are not allowed to do that
but it does not mean anybody who is done doing that he is doing wrong
so a person who is not sufficiently realized who is not advanced in yoga he will not be able to
perceive parmatma in the heart he will not be able to understand how krishna is everywhere
he will not be able to see that krishna is present in all the hearts and all the living entities are
also situated in krishna if i am sitting on chair a devotee knows i am sitting on krishna
i am not sitting on chair i am sleeping sleeping on my bed i am sleeping on krishna not on my bed
the bed chair everything is krishna only how they are krishna because nothing exists in this
world but krishna when a person keeps on doing research what is truth what is truth it is not
wood or stone it is actually electron proton not electron proton some energy
what is this energy three modes what is further mahat tatva further keep on
researching finally a person understands actually this is nothing but krishna
just like fire is situated in one place but fire spreads its heat and light everywhere
in a similar fashion
in a similar fashion
brahm is situated in one place the god supreme personality situated in one place
but through his energies he spread everywhere
when we ignite a fire and we are experiencing the heat and light of fire that heat and light is also
fire the heat and light has no independent existence beyond fire heat and light are
extensions of fire in a similar fashion everything is krishna only krishna personality
and his energies which are always connected to him emanating from his body so pure devotee
perfectly an advanced yogi perfect yogi he perfectly understands that there is nothing
in the world but krishna
so that is why it is not easy to do it is most secret knowledge so that is why a gyani who is
very very advanced person researcher of the truth he has to research for many many births
and after many many births of research what he will understand research work means finding out
what is truth what is truth universe has come from where they are drawing that hadron collider
experiment higgs boson god particle they want to find out the origin so life after life they have
to do research and then they will realize this conclusion what is the conclusion
everywhere whatever we see or don't see around us there is only one thing which is existing that
is vasudev samahatma such a great soul sudhar labha it is very very rare so to understand this
conclusion is not easy lifetimes of research is required however if a person is fortunate to
accept the teachings of bhagavad gita his research becomes very easy just like the people copy
as we all know now as one research scholar was telling me one of our devotees from
here iot that how one very great scientist he copied all the things from another scientist
and he patented and he got the name similarly indian jc bose was the name i think he invented
that telegraph but marconi got it patented so it is registered as his invention so somehow if you
can get that confidential knowledge directly from a person who has known then it becomes research
becomes very easy and you enjoy the result directly so if directly we can take this
most confidential knowledge our life becomes very simple however if you want to do research
then for many many lives we have to continue and provided we don't get astray in between
so this vision is very very difficult vasudeva sarvam iti everywhere there is only vasudeva
nothing else such a soul is very rare so he is explaining here
one who is not factual in the practice of yoga cannot see so clearly so yoga is required this
vision becomes very very easy this realization understanding logical understanding is revealed
by the practice of yoga
then a person can see no i am not god god is also there within i am also there within but god is
present in all the bodies i am present in just this body and this very clear vision is there
developed by a perfect yogi a krishna conscious person can see krishna in the heart of both the
believer and non-believer in the smriti this is confirmed as follows
in the smriti this is confirmed as follows
so that is why pure devotee has no distinction
about ghost form as it is mentioned for us we love some people we hate some people but a pure
devotee a perfect yogi his vision is a sober person or a wild person he is equally disposed
because he does not see the external machines which may be behaving nicely may not be behaving
nicely some car is not functioning nicely and hitting other people because brakes have failed
but we understand the person who is sitting within the car he is different from the car
so suppose our son is sitting in a car and the car malfunctions shall we stop loving the
loving our son no so that is why pure devotee has this vision this friends and
enemies family and non-family these terminologies don't exist for a perfect yogi for him everyone
is family because everyone is part and parcel of god somebody who's behaving nicely who is not
behaving nicely and similar is the vision of krishna also externally krishna may appear to
be punishing somebody that he's killing demons krishna is partial he's saving devotees
or he's always cheating the demons he's always favoring the devotees no so such killing of
demons is also out of love parents sometimes they feed the child nicely sometimes they slap
the child but both the activities are out of love and not because of envy in a similar fashion out
of great love krishna behaves in one way with the devotees behaves in another way with the
non-devotees the machines are not working properly so krishna destroys those machines
and thus relieve the pure devote the demons from those deviate deviant or malfunctioning machines
thus all the people in the kurukshetra who are fighting and trying to kill and attack krishna
also and all the demons putana and all such people who fought from the opposite party or who personally
attacked even krishna krishna liberated them putana was willing to kill krishna she got the
position of mother of krishna so that is why krishna or his devotees perfect devotees they
have the same vision because they see krishna is situated in everyone's heart so this vision is
very very important so whenever we see any living entity we should offer immediately respects all
the living entity should be treated like the same respect should awaken in our heart the respect
we have when we see a temple of the lord as soon as we see temple immediately our head bows down
and we offer respects in a similar fashion when we see any living entity we should have the same
respect for the living entity because lord is situated within so every living entity's
embodiment is a temple of the lord so in this way when we are offering respects to all living
entities at all times not expecting any respect offering all respect to all living entities
keep on giving respect just find a reason to give respect to other living entities and this
reason is very simple that lord is situated within their hearts so when we have this understanding
then we can always chant the name maintain this brahma samsparsham and get freedom from the past
kalmash so the lord being the source of all beings is like the mother and the maintainer
as the mother is neutral to all different kinds of children the supreme father or mother is also
consequently the super soul is always in every living being outwardly also every living being
is situated in the energy of the lord so pure devotee sees that lord is there within and the
living entity is also situated in the lord is situated in the energy of the lord
for one who sees me everywhere and sees everything is me i am never lost nor is he ever lost to me
so the living entity in material world they are not directly taken care by the lord so in that
sense they are lost and krishna is also lost to them they are not able to see krishna so krishna
does not see them directly just like those who are in jail so they are not they cannot directly
enjoy the maintenance the facilities that we citizens enjoy given by the government
they enjoy the facilities given by the jail the prison department
but the government is very much aware about the welfare of all of us who are living outside and
many policies are there coming out to make us happy so for one who sees krishna everywhere
and he sees everything in krishna he is never lost to krishna krishna then takes directly charge
of that devotee and such a devotee also always he is able to see krishna krishna is never out of
sight of such a devotee and lord brahma also in the purport sheila prahupada explains
lord brahma mentions what is the vision of a devotee
such saintly people because they are absorbed in love of god
in their hearts 24 hours they are constantly meditating upon the lotus feet or form of krishna
so they are always seeing lord krishna within their heart
that's supreme lord so we can measure our spiritual advancement by this how much i am able to
uh keep lord krishna in my heart so all our practices are just for this end to always keep
lord krishna in our heart always 24 hours so prahupada that is why he mentions so please keep
lord krishna impression of lord krishna in the heart so we discussed the method that is why the
deity worship is very much recommended when you are worshipping the deity in the morning especially
so try to pray to the lord try to focus on the lotus feet and try to keep that that impression
always throughout the day in our hearts and the more we are able to keep this impression
the more we'll advance and how uh what is another way of doing it that also we discussed
the neophyte should always engage constantly in hearing about krishna so by hearing hearing
hearing neophyte reaches the stage of varanadasha accepts he surrenders to krishna and then he
develops taste in it and then after developing taste he chants in ecstasy when he chants in
ecstasy then he is able to remember krishna when by chanting in ecstasy he is able to remember
krishna the remembrance is initially interrupted and then remembrance goes on without interruption
when that remembrance becomes concentrated that is called meditation concentrated remembrance
and then when meditation also develops uh it becomes very very deep and that deep meditation
continues that is called samadhi and when the samadhi reaches perfection then living entity
understands he has this vision he develops this self-realization he's able to see himself he's
able to see super soul also in the heart so everything starts with always constantly
constant touch with krishna with the holy name of krishna
krishna and there is another very very nice and practical way which prabhupada is recommended
in the 10th canto of bhagavatam how we can develop this vision of a perfect yogi
seeing krishna everywhere in all the living entities and seeing all living entities in krishna
seeing krishna 24 hours in our heart how this can be developed let me share with you so very
nice shloka this is these are the prayers by the demigods for lord krishna when lord krishna
appeared in the womb of mother deviki all the demigods they came and they started offering
prayers so very beautiful shloka
shloka
it means
means constantly hearing about lord means chanting or reciting
some means remembering constantly thinking of the lord's lotus feet and his form
means contemplating the transcendental activities of the lord
so if a devotee is
always hearing devotee is always chanting or contemplating remembering about what
activities the names forms or activities of lord
even while engaged in various activities devotees whose minds are completely absorbed at your lotus
feet and to constantly hear chant contemplate and cause others to remember your transcendental
names and forms are always on the transcendental platform and thus they can understand the supreme
personality of godhead so devatas have previously mentioned offered in their prayers that nobody
can understand you krishna
now
devatas cannot understand danavas cannot understand human being cannot nobody can understand you
so who can understand you
even while engaged in various activities we think oh i have to stop all the activities
and then only i can think of krishna no even while engaged in various activities
devotees whose minds are completely absorbed at your lotus feet and who constantly hear
constantly this word is very important who constantly hear chant contemplate so we may
think oh how we can chant always yes chanting may not be possible always if there is something in
the mouth situation is like that but contemplation is always possible so this process can
continue at all times if is not possible contemplation is possible who all who
constantly hear chant contemplate and cause others to remember your transcendental names
and forms are always on transcendental platform and thus they can understand the supreme
personality of godhead so very nice purport you all can read this 10.2.37
very long purport but the end crux of it is very important prabhupada picks out one word from this
shloka the word kriyasu meaning by manual labor or by work is very important so hearing instructions
of pure devotee are very good because if you simply implement this krishna will make sure
that it happens it comes to pass so prabhupada is mentioning the word kriyasu meaning by manual labor
or by work is important in this verse so prabhupada is explaining one should engage in practical
service to the lord so people tell no bhagwan to humare manme rehte hain aur
sewa ke liye time nahi milta or something no one should engage in practical service of the lord
kriyasu means manual labor is very important in our krishna consciousness movement
all our activities are concentrated upon distributing krishna literature
this is very important prabhupada himself is writing this is very important in our krishna
consciousness movement all our activities are concentrated upon distributing krishna literature
one may approach any person and induce him to read krishna literature so that in future he
also may become a devotee such activities are recommended in this verse so what is this kriyasu
by those activities such practical activities by which you and others can remember
the form name and activities of krishna so such activities distributing books such activities
are recommended in this verse kriyasu such activities now here prabhupada is telling
will always remind the devotees of the lord's lotus feet by fully concentrating on distributing
books for krishna one is fully absorbed in krishna this is samadhi so prabhupada is giving here
a very very merciful way of entering into samadhi in very initial stages
so devotees struggle they ask how to remember that i am seeing the lotus feet in the morning
of the deities or of my photo frame very nicely i am trying to chant also but i am not able to
keep this impression of the lotus feet in the heart so we have to understand nobody can capture
krishna like that mother yashoda wanted to capture krishna but
she was not able to capture the rope was always little short
hiranyakashipu wanted to capture krishna he could not find krishna so in this way krishna
cannot be captured like that but krishna becomes captured when he sees that pure devotee sincerely
trying to engage in his seva in his service so that is why kriyasu manual labor is very important
so such activities which help others also to remember the lotus feet of lord are very very
important and such activities when a devotee engages himself in he is able to such activities
always remind the devotees of the lotus feet of lord being engaged always in book distribution
this is called samadhi prabhupada stilling so thus very practical ways recommended the whole
world is suffering because of lack of this knowledge and yes all other things are important
however distributing these books are most important that is why ved viyas did nothing but he wrote
books many many books all the books ved viyas has given he incarnated simply for this thing just to
write books because without books without reading books we cannot understand yes hearing is important
regular hearing but prabhupada tells if i tell something you hear and you may forget
so if you read very nicely then you can develop systematic understanding of krishna consciousness
and prabhupada tells all your spiritual desires will be fulfilled so we are having so many desires
when will i develop this samadhi when will i develop this vision that i am seeing krishna
everywhere and i am seeing everyone in krishna so i am always enjoying this unlimited happiness
when will this desire be fulfilled if you read my books scrutinizingly all your desires will be
fulfilled all your spiritual desires will be fulfilled so thus reading the books and distributing
the books there's the most important activity recommended by lord krishna recommended by lord
chaitanya maha prabhu so simply if we make this thing the objective of our life that let me
distribute in my life as many books as possible there is a greatest service top most service to
krishna top most save all the time that is why some people sometimes devotees when they were
engaged in even giving some massage to prabhupada prabhupada's body so prabhupada would tell no
this anybody can do so you should go out and preach anybody who can preach you please go out
and then leave the dt worship for those who cannot go out and preach but you please go out and
preach this is most important dt worship is also important both should go parallely because unless
we do dt worship sadhana nicely we cannot do this preaching book distribution also both are required
but if there is one option then we may if there is only one thing that we can do although both
should be done hypothetically i also do want to do only one thing then we should do this thing
distributing book shravanam kirtanam reading distributing chanting and hearing
so in such activities when a person is focusing all his energies in distributing books such
activities always remind the devotees of lord's lotus feet you can experience just engage in
this activity and then you will see easily we are able to remember automatically krishna will
without any external endeavor automatically lord krishna manifests himself in the heart of the
devotee so all these realizations will come when kriyasu by manual labor we have to physically
engage ourselves in activity this wonderful act so this is the beauty of the acharyas purports
very easily we can understand the application so we read scriptures a lot but how to apply in our
life we do not know we do not understand so that is why we have got this practical application of
these activities i request every day we have book reading bhagavad-gita reading sessions in the
evening please join those sessions we are getting taste we are not getting taste in the initial
stages it is not important taste may not come just apply yourself to it blamas sansparsham
keep contact touch with god with his words which are non-different from god and gradually relish
will awaken so please read very scrutinizingly and distribute these literatures always in your
living room in your office just pile up the literatures people will come some will get
attracted they will take it away and then we are always focusing on such activities
then we will be able to enter samadhi develop this vision what is described here
