So there were a couple of questions in the last class. One question was that, Prabhu, I am following everything very nicely.
I am doing Mangala Aarti in the morning and some of you must not be knowing what is Mangala Aarti.
So Mangala Aarti is, Mangal means auspicious, Aratrika, short we call Aarti.
So the first Aarti that we perform to the deities in the morning time in Brahmohurta, that is called Mangala Aarti.
So in most of the temples it happens 4.15 in the morning in our temples
and in some temples it may start even up to 5 o'clock in the morning, but in Brahmohurta it happens.
So the most auspicious beginning of the day starts with engaging ourselves in the service of the Lord, that is called Mangala Aarti.
So that is recommended for all the devotees to have an auspicious beginning of the day.
So the devotee doesn't think that I have a house and God is living me in my house.
In some closet or in some small cavity in a room, no.
In the biggest hall of the house, the devotee makes a nice temple, nice altar
and there he installs either the deities or at least he gives the pictures of Radhakrishna, Krishnabal Ram, Sita Ram, Laxminarayan of the deities.
And then that house belongs to the deities and I am the servant of the deities.
In this mood, the devotee conducts all his activities.
So this house belongs to everything, belongs to Krishna, this house I have taken.
This house also belongs to Radhakrishna, Gournithai, Krishnabal Ram.
So what is my duty? I am their servant.
In the morning I have to wake them up from sleep and then I have to offer them something to eat.
So as soon as the deities get up, immediately some sweet preparation is offered to them.
And after that, all the morning upcharas, it happens.
You offer them their toothbrushes.
The toothbrushes are not plastic ones, but natural.
You have to have small twigs of neem tree and that is offered.
And then you offer them tongue cleaner. You offer them all these things, flowers.
You offer them flower garlands and then they take very nice kheer after that.
And after that, we give them nice bathing and they are offered nice dress, at least one fresh dress every day.
If one fresh dress is not possible, then if we are performing in house and temple, we offer one dress every day.
And in some temples where facilities are better, we offer them two dresses, three dresses in a day.
So as much as possible, we can increase the standards.
So all the time we have to think, oh, they are the lordships.
They are the owner of the house and I am their servant.
So I have to engage myself in their worship.
So chanting is definitely the most powerful process.
There are two powerful processes of bhakti yoga, which we have seen is the culmination of all yoga processes.
So one is called Bhagavad-vidhi and another is called Pancharathiraki vidhi.
So what are these two processes?
So Bhagavad-vidhi means shravanam kirtanam, chanting and hearing the names of Krishna and the pastimes of Krishna,
the knowledge of Krishna, the science of Krishna, shravanam kirtanam.
So that shravanam kirtanam can happen in the form of chanting, japa,
that we do every day as part of our sessions towards the end now.
Or it could be sankirtan, which we do with musical instruments,
Mridanga, Kartal, we sing and dance in front of the deities.
Or it could be hearing Bhagavatam class or Bhagavad Gita class as we are doing now, shravanam kirtanam.
I am doing kirtanam, I am chanting and you are all hearing.
So it can be in any of the form or it could be book distribution,
Book distribution is Brihad Mridanga, that is recorded chanting.
So some words have been recorded and it can go.
So Prabhupada would always tell.
Sometimes the police and authorities would create problems for the devotees in doing sankirtan.
So Prabhupada would always tell, if police authorities or the local authorities are creating some trouble,
it's okay, you need not sing and dance in the street with the instruments.
But distribute my books.
That is Brihad Mridanga.
This Mridanga if you play, Mridanga means that hand drum that we use in our movement.
This if you play, then the sound may go to few meters or some people around that can hear.
But if you distribute books, that is called Brihad Mridanga, then across the country.
So in Srila Prabhupada's time, there was so much book distribution and everywhere when Prabhupada was there,
empowered the devotees and everywhere people would see the devotees,
a devotee is going to go to another country and then on the airport, he would find devotees.
They are doing book distribution.
So sometimes he may tell, no, I will not take like that.
And then he has entered another country, he has landed on the airport.
As soon as he has landed, there is another devotee giving him books.
So everywhere there are devotees distributing books.
Again he may reject, no, no, I don't want.
And then he is traveling in his car.
The car has stopped on the traffic signal.
Again another devotee, please take a book.
So if a devotee is out of his house, somewhere he will come across another.
If a person is out of his house, somewhere he will meet a devotee and purchase a book.
So there was one article, not article, that caricatures they make in the newspapers or cartoonscapes.
So there was something made on his con also that time.
So there is a devotee in the picture.
He is coming and there is another, just another person, a common man, a man next door.
And he meets the devotee, the devotee approaches a man.
And third scene, it is all smoke all around and dishum-dishum like it happens.
Within the smoke, the devotee and they are involved, something is happening.
And in the final scene, the person is moving away with a set of books.
So they were showing how rigorously the devotees would freeze.
That a devotee stumbles upon a person or vice versa.
The other person has to walk away with a set of books.
So Prabhupada was very pleased with this book distribution.
And actually this is the books are specially meant for Kali Yuga.
Earlier books were not required. The Vedas are called Shruti.
Once if a person hears for the rest of his life, he would remember, keep in his mind everything.
There is no need to visit again. He will understand also.
And he will be able to remember also.
Now we don't remember where the question of understanding.
Simple literature like Bhagavad Gita, which Arjun understood in say 40-45 minutes, maximum one hour.
People are not able to understand in their entire life.
So this is the intelligence now.
So because of this poor intelligence, Veda Vyas took mercy upon the conditioned souls.
And Maharshi Veda Vyas, when he saw,
People in Kali Yuga would be very very lazy for spiritual advancement.
They would be always in anxiety because of ignorance.
They will break the laws of nature.
They would be very very greedy and lusty.
Thus always they would be in anxiety.
And because of this, they will be,
They would always be disturbed in Kali Yuga.
So thus showing great compassion, they won't be able to understand, memorize all these things.
Veda Vyas can foresee future.
All the liberated souls are,
They can see past, present and future.
So Veda Vyas has mercifully given us the books.
And especially,
Now that Krishna has left,
And Dharma, religious principles, knowledge, everything has gone with Krishna now.
So now that Krishna is no more with us, no longer with us,
Who is going to re-establish the religious principles?
From where people will derive knowledge?
All the suffering is because of ignorance, of absolute truth.
Who will give people knowledge of what is right in life?
So thus it is told,
This arka, arka means like the sun,
Purana, arka, adhuna, recently, newly,
It has risen up.
So Bhagavatam got composed 5000 years ago.
When Krishna had left the planet,
In order to re-establish the religious principles, Krishna took another incarnation.
So the Srimad Bhagavatam is incarnation of Krishna in the form of book.
So it makes the house as auspicious as installing the deities.
So deity worship may not be possible, although that is also required.
But Srila Prabhupada told, every respectable man should have Srimad Bhagavatam in his house.
So thus, that is Srila Prabhupada told, books are the basis.
That is the basis of our movement.
Prabhupada told, if you make temples, big, big temples, you can make.
Just like Roop Goswami, Sanatana Goswami, they had made big temples in Vrindavan.
But then they may get destroyed.
War can happen. One missile can drop.
You have made the tallest structure of the world.
And one missile can come and the entire temple structure is demolished.
Devotees work for 20-30 years very hard to raise the money and make the temple.
It's very hard to raise money for religious purposes these days.
And then suddenly it is destroyed.
The devotees can be killed.
So it is very tough in some other countries.
In Bangladesh, it is very, very difficult.
People drop bombs in the temple.
One devotee, last year, he got stabbed.
He was getting ready for Mangala Aarti.
And somebody stabbed him in the morning.
So it could be very difficult in Africa.
Many devotees were killed because of the local strife.
So the devotees may not remain.
But the temples can be destroyed.
Aurangzeb destroyed the temples.
Nice temple was made.
Govind Dev Ji temple.
Aurangzeb destroyed.
Madan Mohanji destroyed.
Huge temples.
They have been brought to ground zero.
Krishna Janmubhoomi.
Temples have come.
Mosques have come again.
Temples have come.
A lot of blood should happen.
Destroyed over and over again.
So temples may not remain.
Devotees may not remain.
Devotees may get killed.
Something can happen.
But if the books are there, then new devotees will come up.
Some person may read and he will become a devotee.
So this book distribution is the most important activity.
Most important devotional service.
After chanting, of course.
First we chant.
It begins with Jivaadav, engaging our tongues.
And after chanting, we should focus on how to spread this message to others.
So that happens by book distribution.
So it makes the house very, very purified.
As you install the deities in the house, if you keep Bhagavatam,
house becomes as pure and purified and sanctified by keeping Bhagavatam.
So if you do not have Bhagavatam in your place,
I request all of you should have a full set of Bhagavatam.
So the original Prabhupada books are coming in 10 volumes.
So Bhagavatam is an entire encyclopedia.
So this Bhagavad Gita, what we are discussing now, it is ABCD of spiritual life.
I am not the body, I am spirit, soul.
Everyone was knowing Vedic culture, nothing new.
But now people do not know sense.
Enjoyment is not good.
Everyone was knowing.
But now we are not aware of it.
Next life, past life, heaven, hell.
It was common sense.
People were educated in this thing.
But this ABCD is very much required now that people are not knowing the things.
So Bhagavad Gita is just the basic introduction.
And then after that, how to develop spiritual life,
it is mentioned in Bhagavatam, which is postgraduate study.
It is a final work of Ved Vyas.
When Ved Vyas was dissatisfied after composing all the Vedas and everything,
so Narad Muni told him, why you are dissatisfied?
Because you have not directly glorified the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krishna.
So people ask, Prabhu, I want to read Yajur Veda, I want to read Sama Veda,
I want to read this Upanishad, Mundak Upanishad, then XYZ,
Taittiri Upanishad, Purusha Bodhani Upanishad, XYZ.
So why you are only recommending Bhagavad Gita Bhagavatam?
Why you don't sell Upanishads?
You publish and print all those other Puranas and also.
So we tell them, you please understand.
Ved Vyas, after composing all these things, he was not satisfied.
So Narad Muni told, you have done abominable task.
Why abominable?
Because in the name of religion, whatever.
So Ved Vyas, in order to slowly bring the people,
not everyone is interested in spiritual life.
So as we were discussing Karma Kanda portion, Gyan Kanda portion, Upasana Kanda portion,
people who want material benefits, Vedas mainly offer material benefits.
So that person can actually start his spiritual life,
can actually recognize there are higher authorities in the universe.
There are devatas.
So earlier people would do Yajnas using the Vedic mantras.
And when people are doing Yajnas, they can see, oh, immediately Putreshti Yajna I did.
And I have got a very nice son, even though all other attempts failed.
And then you do some Yajna, immediately you get all the money.
It comes out of it.
And then you become very powerful.
You can generate weapons and so many other things.
Yajna will produce simply by mantra.
There would be fire in the Yajna Kund.
So when people would see that, they would develop faith.
Oh, very nice process.
See how they are doing.
So now because we don't have such Yajna processes, Yajna Brahmanas,
so people are losing faith.
What are these mantras?
However, we should have full faith because we also have some experience.
The experience is of Tansen.
When he would sing, automatically all the lamps would blow up.
Automatically they would light up just by the vibration of singing of Tansen.
So thus it is a science which people experienced not long ago, a few hundred years ago.
When he would sing, automatically there would be fire in all the lamps.
So this is science.
So this is how mantra works.
Now, also, if you go to some villages, you'll find some people very expert in chanting the mantras.
So now because people are losing, people are not seeing these Yajnas becoming successful
because you don't have such qualified Brahmanas.
So they are losing faith in all these things.
So anyway, so in order to draw the attention of people slowly towards spiritual life,
Veda Vyas composed, Vedas offered various this thing.
You perform this worship, you'll get that.
Perform that worship, you'll get this.
Material opulences.
So Narad Muni told people will think this only is religion.
Simply following the Vedic rituals.
Some sanskara and this sanskara and ghray puja, house warming ceremony, some marriage ceremony.
This only is religion.
Religion is not more than this.
Simply chant Ram Naam Satya Hai when the person has died.
This only is religion.
Although I chant at every death Ram Naam Satya Hai, I will not chant when I'm living.
So when that person was living, had you done some Ketan Ram Naam that time,
there was mutual benefit for both, but no.
So people will take these rituals to be perfection of religion in themselves.
So now you please describe directly unless somebody directly engages in service of God.
Kriyate Bhagwati Adha.
Unless he's engaged in service of Krishna directly, there would be no satisfaction in life.
You can be very very advanced in your worship of other devatas.
Just like Raman offered his head.
But what was the situation? Not satisfied.
Still his senses are disturbing him.
Oh, I want this also. I want that money also.
Let me make a tunnel till Brazil, get all the gold, make a golden city and then let me capture Indraloka also.
Let me capture Sita also.
Although I have one of the very nice wives of the universe, Mandodari, very very chaste lady,
very exalted lady, but not satisfied.
So person will never be satisfied.
Just a finger severed from the body cannot be healthy.
We without engaged, engaging ourselves in service of Krishna in full knowledge and material detachment,
there is no question of satisfaction in life.
And we see those devotees who engage, they became satisfied.
Thus Ved Vyas composed Bhagavatam.
So after writing Bhagavatam, he got satisfaction of the heart.
So when Ved Vyas did not get satisfied by writing such scripture,
how we can get satisfaction by reading anything else.
So that is why Krishna tells in second chapter, you read the Vedas.
It is not important.
Understand Vedanta, conclusion of Vedas and Bhagavatam is explanation of Vedanta.
So thus I request all of you, please keep Bhagavatam in your place and please read little every day.
That will bring perfection to our lives.
Reading and hearing Bhagavatam, especially for kalavunashtha drisha amesha,
for Kalyuga when people's eyes are blinded by ignorance, then Bhagavatam is there.
So all of you should read Bhagavatam. It is very, very important.
So this thing is prime knowledge.
You chant, you read and this book distribution is most important.
Because once if you have sent a book, thick book, it will stay for generations.
And anybody when many people, many times children, they come to us who are studying in school
and they tell how you got introduced to Krishna Consciousness.
No, my father was a member.
He never read the book, but I picked up the book and then I understood everything.
It was so nice. I received a call.
I keep on receiving calls sometimes that Prabhu, I want initiation.
And they ask these advanced questions. And how is he has understood?
What is initiation? No, devotees come on book marathon.
And I took them this book from them and I read.
I could not understand in class eight and class ninth.
Again, I read and I understood everything.
So I've left everything. And now I want to take the initiation.
I want to become disciple of Prabhupada. Please let me know the process.
So these books are so very much powerful.
So please keep books, read books and distribute books.
This is called Bhagavad Vidi.
And there is another Vidi that is called Pancharathriki Vidi.
Pancharathriki Vidi means deity worship.
So, Chanting and hearing is the only means of Kali Yuga.
Deity worship was for Dwapar Yuga.
Why you are telling now we should do deity worship?
I'll simply do chanting. Yes, actually chanting is very powerful.
It is explained.
Sheila Prabhupada tells, but a person has to do chanting without committing 10 offenses.
You can search on the Internet.
You'll find 10 offenses are there while chanting the holy names.
So all those 10 offenses have to be avoided and the life should not be sinful
because of past habits are bodies very, very contaminated.
So we are not able to chant properly the holy names.
And thus the holy name doesn't produce the desired effect
because of our past contamination of mind and body.
So this deity worship is very, very powerful for self purification,
purification of mind and body.
Very quick purification happens and then chanting becomes very easily fruitful.
Thus it is told every devotee should take initiation, Brahman initiation
by which he can worship the deities in his house.
Even though you don't have Brahman initiation in your house,
you can keep some frame and offer some incense,
at least offer some flowers every day,
offer some water, some milk.
Actually, everything should be offered to Krishna as we have seen whatever we are cooking.
If that is not possible, something we start offering, offer some flowers.
And Prabhupada tells simply by offering flower and lamp to the picture of Krishna,
you will feel tremendous spiritual advancement.
So there are various aarthis during the day, six aarthis in our temples we do.
But the most important and compulsory aarthi for all of us is Mangala aarthi,
which happens in the morning.
So these two processes Acharyas have recommended, they should go in parallel.
Pancharathriki vidhi and Bhagavat vidhi.
Deity worship and chanting of the holy name should go side by side.
But if I can follow only one Prabhu, it is not possible to follow both, then please do chanting.
However, we should try to do both.
It will help us advance very very fast in spiritual life.
So that is why we do Mangala aarthi in the morning.
So this devotee was explaining yesterday, he asked question,
Prabhu, I am doing Mangala aarthi every day, I am reading Bhagavatam
and I am following, I am doing Bhakti very nicely.
But still the desire to pay Papji is not going from the heart.
So what to do? Papji is very addictive.
So Papji and something else also was mentioned.
I don't remember, I think.
So this desire is not going from the heart.
I want to play and so what is the mistake I am doing?
What is the solution?
So that is why Krishna tells very nice shloka, which we will see now in Bhagavad Gita.
So verse number 30, chapter 9, I will share the screen.
So verse number 30, it is mentioned,
So very nice and important shloka.
So Krishna is mentioning,
He is to be considered saintly because he is properly situated.
So Krishna is telling sometimes, just like another devotee asked another question yesterday,
sometimes we see our God brothers, people who have taken even deeksha, initiation,
they are following spiritual life very sincerely
or may not have taken deeksha but following spiritual life sincerely.
When you consider one same person as your spiritual master,
then all the followers, disciples, they are called God brothers.
Brother means we understand in biological relationship.
And when it is spiritual relationships, spiritual master is considered as father
and all the disciples, thus they become God brothers.
So God brother means another person who is trying to follow Krishna consciousness.
Sometimes their behavior is not very good.
So how to deal with that?
So many times we will see when we come to temple.
And so that is one advantage here.
We will not be able to see the faults.
But disadvantage also, this devotee association is very powerful.
So when we see the devotees, then we see there are some faulty habits.
Their behavior may not be good.
They may become very agitated, very angry.
They may commit some other mistakes.
So how to deal with that?
So sometimes we are very quick to conclude, oh, he is not a devotee.
He is not a devotee.
So here Krishna is telling a very important thing.
Krishna tells api che sudhuracharo.
Dhurachar, achar means behavior, action, character and sudhurachar.
Dhurachar means bad behavior.
Sudhurachar means abominable.
Abominable means most third class behavior as per the material standards, social standards.
So Krishna is telling api che sudhuracharo.
Api in spite of, although a person is doing most abominable actions, bhajate mam ananyabhag bhajate, bhaj dhatu means to offer service.
If he is engaged in mam, in service of Krishna, Krishna is telling my service.
How my service?
Ananyabhag, not any other devata he is worshipping, not any other business he is doing for his personal enjoyment.
But morning to evening, if his life is dedicated in the service of Krishna,
Krishna is telling sadhurevasamantavya. Sadhu means saintly person.
He is to be considered saintly.
How much saintly? Oh, he is 50% saintly.
Mangalarthi karta hai, chanting karta hai, lekin phir kharap kaam bhi karle tha hai.
Kuch past habits hai kabhi kabhi, those habits are manifest.
So no, this person is not perfect sadhu, he is 50% sadhu.
So Srila Prabhupada explains, no, no.
Krishna also is recommending here sadhurevasamantavya.
He should be considered sadhu only 100%.
Samyag vyavasuto hisaha. Samyag means completely situated.
Very soon he will become perfect.
So Krishna is telling, he is properly situated.
Samyag vyavasito, because he is properly situated, Krishna explains.
Shipram bhavati dharmatma shashva shantim nigachati.
Very soon, shipram means very quickly.
Bhavati dharmatma, he becomes dharmatma, righteous soul.
Shashva shantim nigachati.
So we have to understand, all the disturbance in our life is because we break the regulative principles.
We are not supposed to break some laws of nature, especially the four regulative principles.
Sriya, Suna, Dhyuti, Pana, meat eating, intoxication which includes even tea and coffee, gambling, mundane sports and all and illicit sex.
So these principles if we break, then our shanti is disturbed immediately.
So in order to establish ourselves on the platform of peace, a person simply needs to keep away from these activities.
He will come to brahmanical platform.
And then if he chants Sri Krishna Maha Mantra, he rises to Vaishnava platform, devotee platform.
But as long as we are indulged in these activities, either accidentally because of our past conditioning
or because of our, could be intentionally if a person is doing, a person will not have shanti.
But if he's engaged in devotional service, Kshipram very soon you need not consider.
Prabhupada very nicely explains.
Sometimes people ask, Prabhu, what to do?
I am not able to control my senses.
The pull of senses is very, very strong.
So Prabhupada tells you need not think, contemplate.
Oh, how can I control my senses?
What to do?
You simply engage yourself in the service of Krishna very, very nicely, chanting and hearing, serving very nicely.
And automatically you will experience higher pleasure.
You will relish Krishna Consciousness.
And when you relish that Krishna Consciousness, automatically material life will become detestful.
Just like pig is eating stool because pig is tamasic.
But a human being who is not so tamasic cannot eat stool.
So similarly, the modes, the energies of a devotee's body changes.
So when he engages in service of Krishna, he automatically rises to Shuddh Sattvaguna
and then automatically hates sense enjoyment.
And then all the bad habits are taken away immediately.
So this is very, very important.
There are many ways to advance in spiritual life.
And there is one very glorious way to finish our spiritual life.
And what is that way?
That is committing Vaishnava Aparads.
If you offend a Vaishnava, either we speak something which has offended the other person,
although he could be showing some features which are not good.
But you cannot offend that person because he is Sadhu.
Sadhu Ninda person should not do.
And it is explained by Srila Roop Goswami.
Just like you have cultivated a plant very, very nicely in your garden.
One mistake, if one elephant enters the garden, he can uproot the tree,
which has taken four, five or 10 years to grow or 20 years to grow.
One elephant comes and the entire tree is uprooted and your garden is finished.
So it is called mad elephant offense.
So this Vaishnava Aparad is so dangerous for 10 years, 20 years or many, many years.
You have cultivated your spiritual life.
If you commit Vaishnava offenses, then immediately all the spiritual life is finished.
The realization is finished.
Finished means nobody can stop spiritual life.
We are spirit souls, we are eternal.
Spiritual life is also eternal, but it gets paused for a very, very long time.
So there comes a pause in spiritual life.
A person forgets all the spiritual realization and he can lose faith in scriptures, lose faith in God.
And he can become an impersonalist or a person deviant from the path of true spiritual life,
simply by offending the Vaishnava.
That is why Prabhupada tells, do not find fault unless you are given authority,
just like we have to find faults.
Otherwise, other person will not be able to advance.
Devotee never is willing to find fault.
So Prabhupada also, once he was speaking to some devotees
and Prabhupada was speaking of time before 66,
when he went to America and started this wonderful explosion of Krishna consciousness,
Prabhupada told those were nice times because there was no fault finding,
because the disciples were not around.
Prabhupada would not find fault because there is nobody around.
Prabhupada was living alone in Vrindavan.
So now Prabhupada, just imagine what a situation of Prabhupada.
He can find fault one million times and nothing will cause harm to him.
But Prabhupada is setting an example how this consciousness is so important
and devotees love this consciousness of not finding fault in other devotees
who are engaged in the service of Krishna.
Just like a person who can be from a poor background,
but if he has taken admission in a good college,
you cannot accuse, oh, you poor man.
No, just wait. As soon as he finishes his degree, he'll become very rich.
He'll get a good job.
Simply because he has got admission in good college means he has become rich automatically.
In a similar fashion, as soon as we see a person who is always engaged in service of Krishna,
dedicated his life for Krishna, we should never see the faults.
So once Prabhupada, when he came to Surat in India with his disciples in 1771,
Prabhupada got a very, very wonderful welcome in Surat.
And then there was a person, I think it is of Surat only, if I remember correctly.
So a person hosted Prabhupada and all his 20, 25, 30 disciples who had come with Prabhupada.
And westerners were traveling and this food also was very tasty and they over ate.
They were all very new disciples.
And because of all this traveling and eating, so all of them, they felt sick.
So most of them, they were sick, diarrhea and this thing was happening.
And because even though they are devotees now, they have spent two, three years in the movement.
The senior most, they had spent some four years in the movement.
Many were very, very new devotees had just joined few months back.
So they hardly know anything of Indian culture.
So then the devotees are expressing that how we were not behaving nicely and falling sick and eating so much.
They were not having anything to eat.
And so all these things are there.
But then after hosting the devotees very nicely after the Sankirtan program,
when there was time to bid farewell, the the man who hosted he comes
and he offered his respects to Prabhupada.
And then he very, very humbly, he asked forgiveness from Prabhupada that we are very glad that you stayed in our house.
And please forgive me for for the offenses that we have done.
And he was begging.
He was begging excuse from the offenses so sincerely that he started crying actually.
And with tears in his eyes, he was begging, please, excuse, please excuse me if there have been offenses from my side.
So actually, he would have taken offenses from the not so proper behavior of devotees.
But he's begging Prabhupada and crying.
So then Prabhupada told the devotee, see, this is Vaishnava.
So this is actually a Vaishnava.
So Vaishnava sees his faults.
Vaishnava is least interested.
Unless he's given service, you please find fault.
He does not want to see fault.
So Prabhupada tells one nice story also in this respect.
There was one Brahmana and there was one prostitute.
And both were living on either side of the street.
And Brahmana was reading Bhagavad Gita very nicely.
And the prostitute, she was engaged in not so good business, as we know.
And then there was time to leave their bodies.
And came Vishnudutas and Yamdutas.
Vishnudutas, they come to take a person back to Godhead.
Yamdutas, they come to take a person to get punished in the hell.
So Yamdutas, they entered the Brahmana's house.
So Brahmana told, sir, you have come to wrong address.
You should go to the other side, prostitute.
I am a Brahmana.
Those Vishnudutas should come here.
So then there was judgment.
They told, no, no.
All the while you were reading Bhagavad Gita, where was your consciousness?
From your window you were seeing what the prostitute is doing.
And you were thinking, oh, how bad, what business she was doing.
Entire day she is engaged in such activities.
And this is how, this was your thinking at that time.
And the prostitute, although she was engaged in, her body was engaged,
her body was engaged in wrong business.
But from her window she would always see, oh, that Brahmana is so fortunate.
He is always reading pastimes of Krishna and Arjuna.
He is reading Bhagavad Gita.
How nice his life is.
So actually the prostitute was always absorbed in thoughts of Krishna
by seeing the Brahmana.
And Brahmana was engaged in the thoughts of activities of prostitute.
So Brahmana was taken by the Yamdutas.
And prostitute was taken back to Godhead by the Vishnudutas.
So thus Prabhupada told, in this material world is a prison house.
We are all full of faults.
But why you want to contaminate your consciousness by seeing the faults?
Why you want to spoil your consciousness?
Fault is there definitely.
But as soon as you see the fault, you are contemplating upon that fault.
Your consciousness is becoming contaminated.
So many people, they follow spiritual life, but they go away from spiritual life
because of committing Vaishnava Prada,
finding fault in the devotees who are also trying to follow very, very sincerely.
So Krishna here declares in Most Confidential Knowledge 9 Chapter,
Apichesuduracharo bhajate maam ananibhag.
Sadhur, he is 100% sadhu.
Shipram, just wait, shipram bhavati dharmatma.
Because vyavasito hisa, he is established in my service throughout the day.
Very soon he will become very nice devotee.
And the last two words are also very, very important.
Kaunteya tu pratijani hi namye bhaktav pranashyati.
So he is telling Arjuna, you declare boldly to the world, my devotee never perishes.
This line is very important.
So in this line is hidden great secret of success of spiritual life.
What is the secret? We will discuss tomorrow.
So for now, I would like to end the class and we can take some questions.
So those who wish to continue can please carry on with your day.
I will be staying online for some more time to take up the questions of the devotees.
And we will also chant one round of Hare Krishna Mahamantra together.
So first question is, Krabu Jeevar senses.
Again, I repeat, when you pose the questions, please post it after 8.40.
Because then your mind would be absorbed in writing questions.
And this thing you will forget hearing.
Hearing is most important.
Simply if you read attentively and hear nicely, all the questions will be answered automatically by Krishna is sweeted within the heart.
We simply have to do shravanam kirtanam very nicely and attentively.
So please write questions after 8.40 after the class is over, not in the beginning.
And many questions will be answered in course of time.
Krabu Jeevar senses permit what we should ask from Krishna on our deathbed liberation.
We discussed in yesterday's class how liberation is abominable for a devotee.
It is like hell.
So devotee simply wants Krishna, please engage me in your service.
So everyone is selfish, asking, asking, asking, asking why we are so greedy.
Please realize in life by asking, you will never be satisfied.
So try to give something to God, not always asking, asking, asking.
Devotee tries to give to God what I have given to Krishna today.
Oh, today I gave Krishna nice mango shake.
Tomorrow, let me give something else to Krishna.
I made nice bodies for Krishna.
Let me make nice paratha for Krishna.
What I have done for Krishna today.
Today I sang this bhajan, tomorrow I will sing this bhajan for Krishna.
So devotee tries to take care of Krishna, tries to please Krishna.
And when a devotee is having this mood, then there is unlimited bliss in his life.
So please stop asking at least in this life.
Understand Krishna is a person when without any asking you engage in the service of Krishna,
how nicely Krishna would be pleased.
And if Krishna is pleased, where is the question of any deficiency in one's life?
So don't ask, just ask Krishna, please engage me in your service.
Prabhuji, if everything is already destined, then why do we pray or chant?
The answer of this question, we will be starting basic modules after this nine chapter is over.
In that there is a session called law of karma.
In that we will understand everything about destiny.
We will have Jigyasa workshop online in which we cover eight topics.
Dele, the foundation of Bhagavad Gita.
Jigyasa is foundation course on Bhagavad Gita.
So all these questions will be answered over there.
We should be in the company of Dharmic good people.
What if you are married into a family who lack morals?
What do you do, Prabhuji? Is divorce an option?
Divorce is usually not done in the Vedic culture.
So if we have unfavorable life partner and this thing,
if we become Krishna consciousness, if we become Krishna conscious ourselves very strongly,
by our influence, they can change also easily.
You do Sankirtan in the house, you have some pictures of Krishna,
start worshipping and offer them some prasadam.
So simply by eating prasadam of Krishna, slowly entire consciousness will change.
It is very, very powerful process, eating food.
And if you start eating the food cooked by a person who is non devotee,
your Krishna consciousness also will get finished very, very soon.
So thus it is very, very important process.
So please offer prasadam, bhoga to Krishna and then prasadam,
you distribute to the family members who are not so favorable.
And by your love, by your affection, by intelligence,
by yourself becoming very, very strong in Krishna consciousness,
try to change them.
Divorce should be the last option.
Divorce can be there, the scriptures mention.
A woman also can divorce her husband, not just husband, the wife.
Wife can also divorce the husband if husband is patitam, it is mentioned.
If husband is very, very sinful, breaking all regulative principles,
then the option is there for the wife also to divorce.
However, Srila Prabhupa's sister herself had a husband who was breaking
regulative principles.
So Prabhupa told her to stay put in the relationship and continue.
And slowly, I think it got settled everything.
So divorce is the very, very, very last option.
So divorce can be taken.
So sorry, unfavorable life partner can be taken as very good opportunity
to get yourself detached from this material world.
So that's having a good life partner is sometimes an entanglement.
You get entangled in this material world.
So take it as blessing of Krishna.
Remain detached and if possible, try to make them devotees.
However, if husband or wife is a very bad character, not changing at all,
then it can also be done.
There is no harm if such life partner is left.
But for advancement in Krishna consciousness, if not for advancement
in Krishna consciousness, then it is bad.
Then we should not do it.
If you want to follow Krishna consciousness very, very sincerely
and the life partner is fallen, breaking all regulative principles,
then it can be done for Krishna.
You can forgo all duties.
Otherwise, you cannot give up.
I think in this life, there is many, many galaxies,
Earth's and also having the possibility to have same people,
same look like us, which having higher technology than us.
Is it possible?
Yes, there are many, many galaxies in this universe,
and there is no need to go to another galaxy.
Any planet that you see at night in city,
you may not see because of pollution in village.
You will see many, many stars on each and every star.
It is full of life and there are inhabitants.
However, they may not be visible to our senses.
That is another case when Parishit Maharaj was doing the Yajna.
So it is mentioned all the devatas.
They also came and because of Parishit Maharaj's influence,
they were able to see the devatas,
which otherwise are not visible to the common people.
So with these naked eyes or with these senses,
we may not be able to perceive.
However, Vasudhadi Vibhuti Bhinnam in Brahma Saintha,
it is mentioned each and every star planet is full of living entities
who are much, much more smarter than us also,
and much more powerful than us also.
So much powerful we cannot imagine.
What if your own son turns out to be on the wrong path
and acts badly in spite of repeatedly correcting him?
How do you deal with such a situation?
How many chances do you give him to change?
So Chanakya Pandit says,
So when the child is small,
he should be very strict that he doesn't get spoiled.
But when he is grown up, then you have to behave like a friend.
When he is 16 years old,
then the child should, the son should be treated like a friend.
Otherwise, he will break.
So we cannot force anybody to follow Krishna Consciousness.
Prabhupada tells people, children should never be forced specially,
but try to encourage them to follow.
Krishna also does not force.
After explaining entire Bhagavad Gita, Krishna tells,
Kaunteya tu prati janihi na me bhaktav pranashyati.
So a regulated endeavour as a matter of duty,
we can encourage them, please follow, try to follow.
Even after that, somebody is not following what we can do.
So it is our duty to render them good information they may or may not take.
So it is up to them.
So it is up to them.
We should not get very much disturbed.
Every individual has free will.
They may not listen to us ever.
Even when many great exalted devotees are there.
Pehlad Maharaj is great devotee.
His father was demon.
His son again became devotee.
His son became demon.
His grandson again became devotee.
So it is individual choice.
Krishna always respects free will.
So as a matter of duty, you push him,
but don't become very much disturbed because we can only do our duty.
These relationships are also temporary.
In previous life, some other person was a son or a son would have been enemy.
Sometimes the enemy takes birth as son in one's house,
and then he will give a lot of trouble to father.
The enemy's business is to give trouble to the other person.
And nobody can give trouble like your own son if he becomes bad.
So sometimes the enemy takes birth as the opponent's or enemy's son
so that he can give him trouble very nicely.
And he dies very soon.
And when he dies soon, the father would cry.
So he was enemy in previous life, and now he has died soon.
In this way, he is giving trouble to his enemy.
These are the laws of nature.
So that's all these things, the relationships that we have around us.
It is but temporary.
Just we have taken some dress.
We have some temporary roles.
The roles we have to play nicely, otherwise we'll be sent to hell.
So play the role nicely, do your duty nicely,
but understand just duty we have to do with detachment.
These are just roles we are playing here.
And even if they don't pick up, Krishna consciousness is so powerful.
One person in family, if he becomes pure devotee,
entire generations, seven generations back and forth
will be liberated automatically.
So just you become perfect devotee in Krishna consciousness.
Even though your son is an atheist,
Krishna will give him special protection, Prabhupada tells.
So don't worry even if they don't pick up.
You pick up nicely.
Bhagavad Gita is written by Vyasadeva.
Yes, Bhagavad Gita is part of Mahabharata,
actually written by Ganesha, dictated by Vyasadeva.
Because he had very fast handwriting, Lord Ganesha,
so he wrote and Vyasadeva was dictating.
So Vyasadeva is actually composer.
Is it necessary to get initiated
or is it that the proof of an individual being spiritual
or risen in spirituality is initiation?
A householder can also become best devotee without initiation.
Without initiation, there is no life of a person.
There is no initiation means initiation beginning.
The spiritual life begins when a person is initiated.
Without initiation, there is no hope of spiritual advancement.
So householder or factory holder or any holder has to take initiation.
It's very important.
Based on yesterday's meeting,
I am confused that suppose some elderly relative is in ICU
and can only survive on ventilator.
I agree that paralyzed life is no less than a punishment.
But what?
But if you don't go to the hospital,
then also will feel like committing a sin.
It is like killing that person.
At least the subconscious will be disturbed after this action.
How to understand such a situation? Yes.
So as we discussed all these modern corporate hospitals,
how they fleece the populace in general.
They have their own targets.
You have to do these many C-sections.
You have to do these many heart surgeries,
these many neurosurgeries,
and this much diagnosis and all this.
They have targets.
They have to fulfill, achieve targets.
Very, very horrible if you ask the corporate doctors
and otherwise also person is dead.
They would keep for three more days in the ICU
and otherwise also ventilators and all as we discussed.
So if a person is leaving the body,
let him.
Prabhupada was never willing to go to hospital.
He would tell, let me be outside only.
I don't want to go there.
So what is our duty?
Answer is a person may feel guilt if you don't take him,
although we understand that is also painful.
So as a matter of duty,
we can take care of the person.
If the person desires not to go,
don't take him.
If the person desires to go,
you can please take him.
And but where is the limit?
Sometimes people take loans and how much to take loan?
Then also there is confusion to for the medication.
So that is why if you follow Vedas,
there is no confusion in life.
So the way the still are living standards should be so designed.
We should not spend more than 25 percent of our income
in our recurring expenses,
monthly or whatever expenses we have.
Suppose you are earning one lakh rupees a month,
more than 25,000 do not spend on your lifestyle in a month.
You should manage in 25,000 rupees and balance 25 percent.
Some emergencies will be there.
And for relatives,
a householder has duty to take care of his relatives,
also family members and some emergencies like hospital.
Sudden need is there.
Some accident is there.
Something can happen.
So 25 percent maximum are recurring expenses.
25 percent for emergencies relatives
and 50 percent should be used in the service of Krishna.
In this way, if a person spends his money,
then it is mentioned in Bhagavad Gita.
Such a person also can enjoy the bliss of a sannyasi.
What a person might be enjoying in a saffron dress
with a shaven head,
sacrificing his entire time in the service of Krishna.
A householder can enjoy the same spiritual ecstasy
simply by following this process.
Spiritual process,
16 rounds chanting,
four principles everyone has to follow.
But a person who is householder,
how can he engage his entire time in service of Krishna?
No.
So if he spends his money in this way,
50 percent for Krishna,
25 percent recurring expenses,
25 for emergency family,
he also can enjoy the same consciousness.
So this is all we should do in that 25 percent.
You try to go for medication and more than that you surrender.
Just like if somebody is sick in our house,
can we tell the government that
Modiji pleads don't take tax from me this month?
My son is sick or father is sick.
We cannot tell that.
First pay the tax and then you do whatever you want.
So in a similar fashion,
we need to understand simply giving them some treatment.
What benefit temporary treatment will do
rather than saving money from Krishna service.
But if you use that money in the service of Krishna,
you'll become pure devotee and that person
who has left his body wherever he has gone,
he also become liberated because you have become pure devotee.
So the service of Krishna is beneficial for everyone.
So this is the ideal mode of action.
More than that money we should not spend.
Then we are surrendered.
What can be done?
We pray for Krishna, pray to Krishna.
I don't like to wear tilak and kanthi mala.
What is wrong with me?
Is okay that way or there is some problem with me,
Prabhu?
There is some problem,
actually, if you are not liking tilak and kanthi mala.
So Prabhupada tells when you wear tilak and kanthi mala
and you go outside, you go to your office or someplace,
then automatic preaching will happen.
People will come to you.
What are you doing?
Where do you go?
National publicity will happen.
Oh, so many people walking around in tilak and kanthi mala.
Looks like some new fashion is coming.
Let me also try to see what do these people do.
Just like I conducted a session for some people from Delhi,
one office they had come.
So I made them chant and then they asked,
Prabhu, you have not given that bag like we chant on these bags.
This called chanting bag.
Be it should not be exposed.
Well, no, when I travel in Delhi Metro,
I see some people they are using that bag.
Please give us that also.
I also want to use.
So when people see that,
now by seeing people smoking, drinking,
this culture has come up.
So when we go out with chanting bag,
with tilak, with kanthi mala,
we'll change the culture.
We'll introduce Krishna consciousness to society.
So please don't be hesitant.
But yes, if some people are envious,
you are in Pakistan or Bangladesh or some other place,
you may be cautious like that.
But as a general principle,
devotees should have shikha,
should have tilak,
should have kanthi.
And you can dress like a gentleman if you wish.
Have nice shirt, pant, tie, coat, whatever.
But have tilak always,
have kanthi and try to have shikha.
If now you are not able to have,
wear water tilak if you are some hesitant.
If you are not strong in spiritual life,
we will be hesitant.
So it does not matter.
As we told,
there can be many faults.
Krishna is telling simply chant and hear very,
very nicely.
And all this hesitation will go away slowly.
Can we offer anything to Krishna without
Tulsi or Tulsi is necessary in our temple standards?
Tulsi is necessary.
But if that is not available,
then you can offer without it.
Also praying Krishna that there is no opportunity.
So please accept.
But we should not be lose that Tulsi is available
and we are not doing.
So we should try to find Tulsi.
It is very simple to cultivate
little water you give and that's it.
Give some sunlight and some water
and you do some chanting.
Tulsi will appear in the house if she is merciful.
Somehow some circumstances there
then you can offer without Tulsi also.
Otherwise it is necessary
because Tulsi is very dear to Krishna.
So Krishna accepts offerings.
What happens at the time of death for a devotee
and a non devotee?
So it depends what kind of devotee you are.
If you are perfect devotee,
what is a perfect devotee?
Entire life he has followed the instructions
of a spiritual master.
Sincerely, he will go back to Godhead.
If a person is not so perfect devotee,
then Krishna mentions in Bhagavad Gita.
He will go to heavenly planets
and have a long time there
and then he will come to this material world
and he will take birth in a very aristocratic
rich family so that he doesn't have to
work very hard and spend his time
for earning money and spending Krishna
consciousness rather.
Or he will take birth in Brahman or Vaishnava
family where again he can cultivate nicely
Krishna consciousness.
And a non devotee again depends upon karma.
Non devotee can become liberated.
He can go to Brahma Jyoti if he is
impersonalist and a non devotee
can also be sent to hell or he can take birth
as human being or animal.
Everything depends upon karma.
But for a death for a non devotee
is like a student who has not studied
in exam and exams have come.
He is very very fearful.
Exam is miserable and the result is also miserable.
And devotee means who has studied
very nicely. He will top, he will get
very best job and exam is a happy situation
for him. Now he is going to finish his studies
and get money.
So death for a devotee is very nice.
I am very eager that I am going to see Krishna
now face to face.
And non devotee is scared. Oh my god!
What will I do now? I am going to die.
Excellent explanation of text 30.
So much happy to hear.
Prabhupada Ji is saying soon turn to 100%
saintly that true.
Everything mercy of Srila Prabhupada.
Can you extend the class for another chapter also?
We are expecting to continue the class.
Please Hare Krishna.
So we will have a polling tomorrow.
Basis your polls. We will decide to continue
and in what frequency.
In this period of lockdown, what more
can we do to
practically engage in service apart from
chanting and reading? Do preaching.
Preaching is very important. Chanting and
reading is very important. We are doing for
our benefit. But preaching is very important.
Prabhupada tells if you don't preach this
Hari Bol, Hari Bol will all get finished
very soon. So devotees
often chant Hari Bol in enthusiasm
and they jump and dance. But unless
you are preaching, this thing will not sustain.
This enthusiasm will go down. So please preach.
Now how can I preach?
So what do I do now?
So now this
online platform is there. So we are very
fortunate. So online you share
these classes. We are happening. Invite
people to these classes. Why 100 to
100? Let us have 1 lakh, 2 lakh people
and let them hear Hare Krishna chant nicely.
Everyone will be happy.
So apart from chanting and reading,
you can try to preach very very nicely.
Keep speaking to your friend. I have come across
this philosophy. Call him. Make a call.
Very nice. We are not the body. We are trying
to satisfy the body. But we are different.
So we are dissatisfied. We are
part and parcel of God, Krishna. Just like
finger is part of body. Without
serving God, meditating upon God,
we cannot be happy. Preach very simple thing.
And Prabhupada requests them simply
to chant Hare Krishna. If he does not
chant, what is the loss on your part?
You have advanced. Other person picks
up or doesn't pick up. It is his
benefit or loss.
But simply because you have attempted to
preach, you have advanced tremendously in spiritual
life. And you will feel spiritual
bliss and freedom from all the bad activities
very very soon. But you preach.
You keep on preaching. Keep on calling
your contacts. And explain them
basic Krishna consciousness. You are not the body.
You are servant of Krishna. We are all servant of
Krishna. He is eternal relative. And
we should try to develop love for him.
And it is my simple request. I am not
asking money or much time. Please chant this
Hare Krishna Mahamantra. Experiment
in your life. Just for one week
without fail, chant and hear attentively
every day. Please request him, Prabhupada.
What is the loss? This is all that we
can do. Then it is up to him. So please
try to attempt this. And if you want to
understand more, we have this discussion.
Share the link with him. You can please come
in here and ask questions. Soon
we will have small question answer sessions also.
Because
some 100-200 people, it is difficult to answer
questions. So we will have various
slots. 11 to 1, 1 to 2 like that.
And then limited people can come in a
small meeting and ask questions.
And we will engage other devotees also.
So just like our devotees,
they practically tell
when we started the center.
And they would go for fundraising.
And the devotees, sometimes they
end up suddenly because people
generally don't give appointment for giving
money. So devotees sometimes they just
enter and they request
that we have this thing. We are preaching
Bhagavad Gita, feeding prasadam. Would you
like to contribute? Sometimes they
reject very badly.
Get lost. What are you doing?
So those people who are good industrialists
of the city and they behave badly
with their devotees, they are destroyed.
The devotee told who stayed in the same
city for 10-15 years. They told they are destroyed.
And small people who started helping,
they became very, very wonderful.
So ordinary karma takes time
to manifest. But Vaishnava
knowingly or unknowingly done
immediately spoils our material destiny
also. And Vaishnava
seva done knowingly or unknowingly
immediately improves our
material life also. Immediately,
although we should not expect this thing,
but Prabhupada explains Krishna takes special
care. So knowingly or unknowingly,
please, that is why don't offend anybody.
Why? Vaishnava Prabhupada tells
we should be respectful. Bhagavata mentions
to all living entities at all
times. A person who is simply
respecting the devotees worshipping deities
in the temple, the deity in
the altar, Krishna who is standing, he is only
thing and does not know how to give
respect to devotees and general living
entities. He is on material platform.
His spiritual life has not started actually.
So Prabhupada mentions the
Vedas mentions very, very nicely.
Just like Krishna is living
in the temple and temple is very sacred place
for us. The entire temple is worshipable.
Similarly, in
every body in our heart, Krishna
is living. So every person
should be respected, not
just person, every animal, every
plant, every tree should be respected.
So Rishabhdev tells you should offer respect
to all living entities at all times.
This is Krishna consciousness.
Wherever we see, we see that is house of Krishna.
This house also, this animal also,
this tree also, everywhere Krishna is living.
So he is offering respects like
when we are passing in our car
or scooter, whatever in front of temple,
we bow our head and we pass on.
Similarly, we should be engaged in offering
very high respect
to the devotees and complete
surrender to Krishna. But
respect to all living entities also
at all times. It is very important.
So there is no question of doing a prada
even to general living entities. A person
should not, that is why it is told,
satyam bruyat priyam bruyat. You have to
speak the truth, but that truth should be palatable.
Only when we are giving spiritual
instruction, this rule can be violated.
Even though truth is unpalatable, speak directly
to save the person. Otherwise, even
though it is truth, you are not supposed to
offend the other person. Satyam bruyat priyam bruyat.
Palatable truth should
be spoken. Shum nishum
kosh ma parvati with lusty desires
and got killed. But when Gopis
approached Krishna with lusty desires, they got
liberated. Can you please explain? Yes,
Prabhupada explains. Any person who
approaches Krishna with lusty
desire, with greed, in anger
or in any way, because Krishna is supreme
pure, just like fire.
If you rush towards fire
with great love or with
hate or with whatever feeling, if you touch
fire, your fingers will get burnt.
So Krishna is supreme pure. You just
approach.
Some or the other. Absorb your mind
in Krishna. Come in contact with Krishna
and we'll become purified, Krishanized.
So thus all the Gopis became liberated.
So more questions
I would like to answer, but
time is not allowing. So we'll try to
discuss in future. So many questions
today. So we'll discuss definitely.
If not now, then in what
Q&A sessions we are planning,
post this April 14th. So
now I request all of you to chant the Hare Krishna
Maha Mantra. This is most important
thing. We'll be safe from the offenses.
We'll be able to, how to deal with God
brothers. The question was, so understand
we have Durachar, but
don't find faults and chant
and hear very, very nicely. Unless
we are chanting and hearing very, very attentively,
these mental gymnastics
give respect, be humble, be good
and all these things are not going to work.
Laws of nature are so strong, so
powerful, helplessly we lack
respect as per our nature. So
thus, if you want to transcend our nature,
we need to put Krishna in the heart, then
material energy will not work. So
we have to chant and hear very attentively.
So spines can be erect, eyes
can be half or fully closed.
