So we discussed yesterday the difference between material compassion and spiritual compassion.
So it looks like some people got confused.
What is this? Saving somebody is violence, pleasing somebody is violence and killing is compassion.
So I should kill somebody to show compassion or should I save someone to show compassion?
Or if I am pleasing someone, I am committing violence. What do I do actually?
So Srila Prabhupada tells a very nice story in this connection. It is mentioned in the Puranas.
Prabhupada explains that there was a sage and usually when we come across sages, we ask for benedictions for our benefit.
So this sage, he met four people, four different classes of people and then he awarded some benedictions to all.
And surprisingly, he offered different benedictions to all these different categories of people.
He did not award the same thing. So he did not behave equally with all.
So who were all these people and why did he not behave equally with all of them?
What was the reason of this partial behavior?
So one of them was Rajputraka, the son of a king.
And the second person was the son of a Muni, the son of a Brahmana, following Brahmacharya.
And the third person was a butcher and the fourth person was a devotee.
So to Rajputra, to the prince, he offered benediction.
Rajputra chiram jiva. Rajputra, you may keep on living for a long time.
Chiram means for a long. Jiva means you keep on living. May you have a long life.
Oh, maybe he is happy with the Rajputra. He did a nice service. So he is offering like that.
Then came the turn of Muniputra. And when the Muniputra came in front,
the son of a Brahmana, a strict Brahmacharya, he told Muniputraka ma jiva.
You don't live, you die immediately.
What is this benediction? Somebody has come in front of you asking you a benediction
and you are telling you die immediately. What offense have I done?
You are telling me I should die and you have offered just the other person.
May you have a long life. So then comes the chance of third person.
Butcher. Butcher is offered the benediction.
Ma jiva ma mara. It means you don't live and you don't die.
What is this? Either a person can live or die.
He is telling you don't live and you don't die. So what is he supposed to do?
And then fourth person, devotee. To devotee, he offers the benediction.
Jeeva ma mara. It means either you live or you die as you wish.
So Srila Prabhupada tells there is a very great science behind these four benedictions offered to these people.
So the Muniputra, he is absorbed, the Rajputra, the son of a king, the prince,
he is absorbed in various sense pleasures.
Enjoying wine, intoxication, illicit sex and so many other things.
So because of this, he is going to suffer like anything in hell.
Srila Prabhupada tells you want to enjoy so much of sex life.
Human life, it is not possible. Human body does not have that capacity.
So nature can give us pigeon body or monkey body or some other bodies.
You can enjoy every hour or three times in an hour.
But then you can enjoy one kind of pleasure, sex pleasure definitely.
But otherwise your life would be always horrible.
Animal life is very, very horrible, always in anxiety.
So always in fear. So Veda still there are these special features of special unique species.
So the animal is always fearful, always entire life.
Small animal is fearful. Another animal may not attack me.
Somebody may not come kill me. He's always fearful.
And human beings, they're always in anxiety or how to get that, how to get that, how to protect it, how to protect that.
So human life is always full of anxiety. Animal life is always full of fearfulness.
Entire life, they are fearful. So nature will give us hellish body.
So that is why the benediction offered was anyway you are going to have a hellish life.
So whatever comforts you are going to have in this life, you enjoy those comforts because your future is very bad.
So you told Chiramjeeva, you keep on living, continue whatever your so-called good life is there.
Future is bleak, very dark. And what about Muniputra?
Muniputra has already done so much of austerity, tapasya.
He's a brahmachari, he's following life of strict vows, rules and regulations.
So he is ready to go back home, back to Godhead.
So that is what is the use of living and taking so much austerity and tapasya here.
If you die now, you are ready. You have done very nice brahmacharya.
Immediately you will go back to Godhead. Your life is successful.
So that is why the benediction offered was you don't live.
So that is why sometimes we may see even one of the Prabhuji's in UK, he died because of corona.
So some people may ask, what, a devotee has died? What is the reason?
So no, we can see even sons of Krishna, they also died. Entire Yadu dynasty got killed.
How they got killed? The Yadu dynasty got killed by attacking each other.
They got intoxicated very badly and then they killed each other.
Entire Yadu dynasty, all the descendants of Krishna, almost except what was his name, Vajranath,
who has made all the deities, those who have seen the Jaipur temple, Dwarka temple,
the Govind Dev Ji deity or who have visited Srinath Ji in Udaipur, Nath Dwara.
So all these deities were carved by Vajranath and many, many temples installed.
So otherwise, most of the Yadu dynasty, it died killing each other.
So one thing, what is this? Krishna could not train his sons. They killed each other.
No, that was special favor shown to Krishna. Krishna's sons were so powerful,
no power in the world could have defeated them. So that is why Krishna arranged,
you among yourself only can kill each other. So those people, they killed them
by attacking each other into intoxication and went back to Godhead.
So Krishna wanted to call them back to Godhead soon. Thus, this thing was arranged.
So apparently, which is a very, very stressful situation, all of them have died.
But actually, they have gone to live with Krishna. So thus, Muniputra was offered this benediction.
Your tapasya is enough. You need not continue your life. You die immediately and go back to Godhead.
Now, Buchar's life is very, very bad. Buchar is living in an abominable situation.
He's living among the dead bodies. He's chopping the dead bodies.
Just imagine somebody throws you among dead bodies and you have to kill, cut, chop, pack those dead bodies.
It is so horrible, so horrible. And after your death, you'll go to hell.
So thus, Buchar's life is abominable now and future life is also very, very horrible.
So that is why he told, your life is anyway miserable. So you don't live, you don't die.
I cannot tell you continue living because you're having a miserable life.
I cannot tell you die also because future is even dark. So what do you do?
Ma jiva ma mara. You don't live and you don't die. This is the situation.
And then devotee. The devotee was offered a very unique benediction.
He was offered jiva ma mara. Either you live or you die.
Because if the devotee is living while living, he will continue to serve Krishna as he's doing here.
And if he dies, then he will go back to Godhead.
So now also he's serving Krishna and there also he's serving Krishna.
Devotee is liberated here and he's liberated there. So there is no difference in the life of a devotee.
That is how we read. We understood on the day of Sri Ram Nami, the appearance day of Lord Ram Chandra,
that how all those people of Ayodhya, they were free from all the anxieties of life
and they were living in spiritual world. The laws of nature were not acting.
No miseries of hunger, thirst, lamentation, anxiety were affecting them.
And they were so free to the extent that even death would not affect them.
Death will only come to those people who are going to leave this body and are willing to go back to Godhead.
Because now also they are serving Lord Ram Chandra there in spiritual world,
although apparently in the material dimension and after death anyway they'll go back to Lord Ram Chandra.
They'll serve in the spiritual world. So now they are liberated. After death also they'll be liberated.
So death also is not acting upon them. So the benediction given to devotee is whatever you wish you do.
Now also you are in bliss. After death also you are in bliss in serving Krishna.
Your life is same here, there, anywhere.
So thus everyone in this material world, he's trying to avoid the miserable condition and have a happy situation.
He's trying to go to heavenly planets or heavenly countries or cities
and he's trying to avoid hellish situation, hellish planets, hellish places or countries.
But it is told, the Shastras tell very nicely, what is the position of devotee of Krishna?
Then he is not afraid of the hell, going to hell also he is not scared.
He is not at all afraid of going to hell or going to heaven
because devotee, although apparently lives in this material world, but he is not in material world.
How he's not in material world. So that is explained by Krishna here. And before that,
so let us conclude this topic of compassion, which we are discussing. So this compassion
does not necessarily mean that you elongate somebody's lifespan. So people tell that science
has become very advanced and people are having a longer average lifespan. But what is that
lifespan lifespan on ventilator in the issues anyway having miserable life and spending
all the hard and money which he has got in his life and the relatives are working very
hard to let the person live for some more time. So anyway, he's continuing a miserable
body. If he dies, he'll go to a good body. What is the use of prolonging this body? So
this artificial prolongment of life, it is foolishness. It is done only by ignorant people
who think there is no next body. If your body has reached such a state that it has to be
contained by artificial means, what is the use of keeping such a body body simply a machine
as soon as a machine is not working properly, you change it. Anyway, nature will arrange
next body if you are not liberated. So pick up another good body, pick up next body. So
if you know the person is going to die, chant Bhagavad Gita, make him hear Hare Krishna
Maha Mantra, put some Ganga Jal into his mouth and in this way purify his existence, his
next body is going to be very good. So this is called science. But now people do not know
they think prolonging the body is great success. That is a punishment to the soul. Just like
if the seat of your bicycle comes out and still you are riding that bicycle. It is very
horrible situation. Leave it. No, take up another new bicycle. So in a similar fashion,
this is advancement of science. Without seat person is made to ride the bicycle. So it
is punishment for the soul. So this is what happens in ignorance when a person does not
know the concept of soul. Another ignorance is just like all the humanitarian organizations,
they are pressing for abolition of capital punishment. Human Rights Commission, all other
people, if any country is giving capital punishment, they are telling why you are giving. Please
do not kill a person. Anyway, he has got one life. So if he has continued, if he has done
some mistake, give him long term of imprisonment, but do not kill him. Let him live. Have some
compassion of the heart. But Manu Sainita says the other way round. Manu Sainita are
the laws given by Krishna because Manu is representative of Krishna, directly taking
instructions from him. So it tells very nicely that if a king kills a person who is a killer,
then such execution by the king is actually mercy upon the killer. Because if a person
has killed somebody, he is not killed immediately in this life. His next life, future life is
going to be horrible. This is the law of nature. If you have taken loan from somebody, money
from somebody, and if you do not return the money to that person, then in the next life,
you have to return back money four times. So these people were very, very cautious.
When a person is dying, he's telling his son, you please go and settle the thing with him.
So there is a case Prabhupada tells once a person died and he told his son, I had taken
loan from such and such person. You please go and return the money back to him. And the
son went as per the instructions of father that my father had borrowed a loan and by
will of providence is no more. So kindly accept the money back. Now this person apparently
he has forgotten that he gave some money to his father and he's not willing to take. He's
telling, no, no, if I take, then I have to come back again in next life simply to return
this money four times to your father. So I don't want to take. Now this person is worried
he's taking, you please take, you please take. Otherwise my father has to take one more
word to settle or he has to return four times. And he's telling, no, no, I will not take
because I don't remember. I have to take one more birth. But there's a science. When a
person knows the science of soul, he understands simply because of the ignorance of the soul.
People are not punishing a killer and does that person will be punished much, much more
miserably if he's not killed in this life. So that's actually what so-called compassion
which people are showing to the killer is not compassion. It is actually violence by
saving the killer. You are doing violence upon him. Just like if a person has some heart
problem by not doing surgery, crude example, you're committing violence, cutting out the
heart of a person can be considered violence by an ignorant man. But it is very great
act of benevolence by a knowledgeable doctor. So that's it is important to have knowledge.
Some people tell, what is the use of falling spiritual life? I will do good to others.
No, in order to do good to others, you need to have knowledge of what is good. This is
very, very important knowledge of absolute good. Just like I have told the instance in
my class also real life instance, how the person when the wife delivered a beautiful
baby and the wife was feeling weak, husband wanted to help the wife recuperate from the
weakness. So immediately the husband went and brought some juice for the wife and by
taking that juice, the wife died on the spot and doctors came and scolded the husband.
This kind of juice you should this kind of juice you should never have given to the wife.
It creates some negative reaction in the body. So that husband was doing good to the wife,
but that was not absolute good. That was relative good. It was good as per his concept. If I
give juice to my wife, my wife will become very, very strong. But ultimately that led
to death of wife. So very nice instances told in Mahabharata, some unique situations of
Kali Yuga a person could see. So one situation was the cow is licking its calf and so much
licking that the calf has started bleeding. So what does it mean? So it means parents
will show so much compassion to their children, indulge them in so much sense gratification
that this will become the cause of suffering for the children. So that's actually if you
are providing the material comforts over indulgence to other person, you are thinking you are
giving them a very nice life. But actually this is violence making somebody's life. If
you are giving more pleasures of overindulgence sense gratification, that is actually violence.
How Lord Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita 5.22, as soon as you enjoy your senses with the
sense objects, it gives rise to only misery. So the enjoyment of senses only produces more
and more miseries because anyway a person is not satisfied with that. And to increase
the sense objects more, he has to work very, very hard. His life becomes miserable in such
a way. And then in the next life, he is creating more bodies to enjoy such kind of sense gratification
more. And as soon as you create a body, there is misery of birth. There is misery of death.
There is misery of old age, disease, anxiety, hard work and so many other troubles. Thus
Krishna tells life of sense enjoyment, which 99.9% of all of us have been educated, trained
in that way. Why you have to work hard? So that you can enjoy the senses and mind. Krishna
is telling it means birth. It will only give birth to miseries in your life. If you are
living a life for enjoyment of senses, the cow is licking so much its calf that the calf
has started bleeding. This is the situation in Kali Yoga. In the name of so-called care
and compassion, people are killing their own dependents. So thus it's a very horrible situation.
So this is violence. Actually unnecessary all and overindulgence in pleasing the senses
of somebody is actually violence. You are creating more and more bodies for him. Even
a person who is doing good activities, he's committing violence upon himself also because
for reaping the results of the good activities, that person has to come back again in this
material world. He has to suffer from more births and deaths. So that is why Krishna
tells about so-called the discrepancy, but the book, but the yoga jahati ha about so-called
the discrepancy. Krishna explains in second chapter, but the yoga, he tells Arjuna by
following this process, you get rid of the activities of good actions as well as bad
actions. It is not that we have to do good actions and get free from bad actions. No,
any action good or bad on material platform is bad because we have discussed it keeps
us in this prison of material world. A person keeps on taking repeated births and deaths.
So this is very, very important point. We should not do good activity. We should not
do bad activity. We are supposed to do a karma, neither good activity nor bad activity. And
the main aim of life, the actual compassion, real compassion is to free a living entity
from this unlimited repeated births and deaths, which created unlimited misery in the life
of people. And for this, if some hardship has to be taken on the central platform, that
is not violence. That is actually compassion, taking so-called hardship. Some people do
not fast. So there is a spiritual organization who was telling me, I think one of you was
telling, I don't remember the name. I think we should was telling, I'm not sure that this
society. So we all fast on Janmashtami. So one of his friends, I think he was going to
this society organization and they told him, why you are fasting? So this fasting is committing
violence upon oneself. You are putting your body into trouble. Bhagavad Gita preaches
nonviolence. Why you're committing violence upon your own self. So this fasting is not
good. It is violence. Says, actually, if you see it is violence, it is self-violence. The
stomach is turning. Please give me food, give me water. And you're not giving the food and
water to yourself. So this is self-violence. No, this is real compassion. Staying hungry
on such important days. It is actually compassion. It is not self-violence because people do
not know what is our real position, actually, that this whole society is completely misguided
in the name of showing compassion. We are putting under other person into rigorous violence.
And in the name of so-called violence, there is actually compassion, which they are not
able to figure out. So that's it is very, very important to give this most important
knowledge to society. So how to come out of this cycle? A person is not able, not supposed
to do good activities, and he's not supposed to do bad activities also. So that is what
we saw in the last class. Krishna is telling that a person who engages in karma yoga, karma
yoga in Krishna consciousness, there are two levels of karma yoga. One thing is you work
very hard without attachment to the result. So all of us are acting so that we can get
the result. This is our karma. This is very, very third class action, abominable action.
A person should never work for the for enjoying the results. A person should simply work
for the results. Success or failure does not depend upon us. Prabhupada would always tell,
some people would ask why, Srila Prabhupada, you're writing these books, people may read,
may not read. So Prabhupada told people may or may not read. I am writing for my purification.
My Guru Maharaj gave me the instruction to write books in English. That time in independence
era, just India had got independence. And even in pre-independence era, Prabhupada was
told to preach in English. Who didn't understand English at that time? And Prabhupada was given
instructions to preach and write in English. And Prabhupada was writing in English. And
how many people were knowing reading and writing that too in English? But no Prabhupada told.
My Guru Maharaj has told me, so I will do that. So even when Prabhupada took sannyas,
so after sannyas he was requested to speak on the initiation ceremony. So first initiation
is when a person takes brahmacharya, then harinam initiation, then brahmana initiation
after that. Harinam, brahmana, after that a person may take sannyas initiation. Then
he becomes a sannyasi. So all those people, local Vrajavasis were sitting over there and
even Vrajavasi sadhus, mostly that time Americans, entire world, they had not picked up Krishna
consciousness. So they were all knowing Hindi or the local language. But Prabhupada started
speaking English over there. So some people could think, why is he doing like that? People
do not understand English apart from some of his godbrothers who were educated and
disciples of Bhaktisdhan Maharaj. Why is this person, Srila Prabhupada, he speaking in English?
So Prabhupada told, I am simply doing it under the instruction of my Guru Maharaj who has
ordered me to preach in the English language. So this is the faith of a bona fide disciple.
So I am not worried about the result, Prabhupada told. The way my Guru Maharaj has told me
to preach, I will preach in that way. People may pick up or may not pick up, it does not matter.
Prabhupada told, we will cry in the wilderness, let nobody hear. But our duty is to preach.
This is how a person is supposed to have faith in the instructions of his spiritual master.
Then he gets empowered to preach the holy name, advance in spiritual life and make others
also advanced also. Faith in the words of Krishna and spiritual master, this is the
measure of one's spiritual advancement. That's it. So spiritual master was having such strong
faith in the words of his spiritual master, Bhakti Siddhanta Maharaj. So just to fulfill
his mission at old age, he went to America. My Guru Maharaj has told me, so let me attempt
to preach this message. And we see how he became immensely successful. So this is how
a person is supposed to do result. We are never supposed to be attached to the result.
Modern motivational speakers, they tell, yes, you can do it. You will be able to do it.
Imagine you are getting success. Imagine this thing is happening. This is foolishness. Krishna
does not tell in Bhagavad Gita like that. Krishna told to Arjuna in Bhagavad Gita, if
you win, then you can enjoy very nice sovereignty on this planet. You enjoy a nice kingdom and
opulence. And if you lose, if you die, you can die. Krishna is not telling I am God.
I will protect you. You will not die. Nobody can kill you. No, Krishna is making Arjuna
ready for both situations. You can win the battle or you can lose your life. You can
be killed also. So if you win anyway, you will rule over this planet earth. And if you
die, where is the loss? A fighter who loses his life on the battlefield immediately goes
to the heavenly planets and has a very nice life over there. So where is the loss for
you, Arjuna? So that's it is a great cheating which is going on in the world. False motivation.
And when people do not get it and how they will get it in competitive world, one person
will top the exam. Limited people will get it, reach that position. Rest all remain.
They all remain on frustrated platform. So Krishna tells, remain ready for both the outcomes,
success or failures. Krishna gives the definition, what is yoga? People think if I am doing
my job nicely, I am working till 12 hours, 12 hours, I am a Karmayogi. No, that way and
as is the biggest Karmayogi, morning to evening, he is taking loads of clothes on his back.
So no, he doesn't become a Karmayogi. Karmayogi means siddhi asiddhi samobhutva. A person
success or failure as per Krishna's plan, as per my previous activity, I can be successful.
I can get promotion in my job. I can get more money or I may get demotion. I may get infamy.
People may not respect me. I may be thrown out of job. It does not matter. I will do
my duty very nicely and I am not bothered about the result. This is called yoga. So
without attachment to the result, without caring for success or failure, a person simply
acts. Not more than 8 hours in his job. This much time I have, this much time I will put.
If result has to come, let it come. If job has to go, let it go. It doesn't matter. That
is called yoga. Like Dronacharya. Dronacharya, what is his duty? His duty is to teach whoever
comes to him. Now the same person can kill me. It does not matter. I am not bothered
about the result. Siddhi asiddhi samobhutva samatma. He is equipoised of the result of
his activity. He is doing his duty. My duty is to do this, to teach whoever comes to me.
This science is not known to people. So this is called karma yoga. Karma yoga means without
attachment to the results. You simply act without caring. You will be successful or
you will be failure. And there is another level of karma yoga. This karma yoga is explained
in third chapter and then higher level of karma yoga which Krishna explained now in
the previous verse. That means in higher karma yoga also, a person is not attached
to the result, but the result he offers to Krishna. In first case, the result he will
offer to anybody for general good cause. But now he has become advanced in knowledge. By
following that karma yoga, simply giving up the results of his activities, he rises to
the platform of knowledge, transcendental knowledge, which Krishna has explained in
fourth chapter. And then after fourth chapter, he gets transcendental knowledge. Fifth chapter,
he understands Krishna is supreme and then he starts offering the results of his activities
to Krishna. And when a person reaches this platform, which we saw in the last class,
whatever you are doing, whatever you are offering, whatever rituals you are doing,
whatever charity you are doing, whatever tapasya you are doing, whatever you are eating,
whatever food you are offering should be done unto me. This is called action in Krishna
consciousness. And what is the result of doing all these things for Krishna? Everyone is doing
all these things. But we are doing for some other people without engaging Krishna. A man
works very, very hard and all the money brings and offers to wife. You please take it.
I offer it to you. And in this way he's offering. So wife, whatever food she's offering at
house, she's offering to the husband and children, you please eat. So what we have to do is simply
make Krishna the center of all these activities. So it does not mean only feed Krishna and let
the husband tell, no, no, I've read Bhagavad Gita. I'll feed Krishna tomorrow onwards. Husband,
you please stop. No. So you feed to Krishna. Krishna is so kind that he eats and he leaves
also. So you keep the plate in front of Krishna. Krishna simply by seeing at the dish or hearing
your prana mantras, he can taste the dish that is spiritual eating. And then when Krishna leaves,
you mix it with the rest of the food, which you have cooked and you offer to your husband,
children, parents, in-laws, anyone in the family. So that is spiritual life. It is very,
very easy. So in this way, so it does not mean that we don't have to take care of children. We
don't have to feed the children, feed the children, educate the children so that they can also become
very good devotees, engage in the service of Krishna. And typical example is that of
Srila Prabhupada. Srila Prabhupada was a very brilliant student. And Prabhupada told in my school
life also people would consider me as a leader. He was there in Scottish Church's College, junior
of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose in Calcutta. And there was some arrangement of Prabhupada to be
sent to the West, to be sent to London, actually, for pursuing a career in law or something. Because
London was ruling over India. And if a person goes to London, that was considered very good.
All the aristocratic families and the sons of kings, they would go to London,
Jawaharlal Nehru and all these people, they went. So there was arrangement that Prabhupada would go
and become very, very aristocratic and educated. But Prabhupada told, my father denied. My father
told, if he goes there, he may fall in bad association. He will pick up all the wrong
habits of me eating intoxication. I don't want this. I want my son should become
servant of Radharani. So thus Prabhupada's father, Srila Gaur Mohan Dey, he was teaching
him how to play Mridanga. And Prabhupada's mother was objecting, what he will do by learning
Mridanga? Teach him something valuable, which is good for his career. But Prabhupada told,
my father was a pure devotee. He was always teaching me Krishna Consciousness.
And Prabhupada's father was always worshipping. Prabhupada would tell
that at night my father would be worshipping and we would go to sleep. When we are up in the morning,
again he is worshipping Radha Krishna. And this way Prabhupada's father, Prabhupada told, was
pure devotee. And Prabhupada picked up all the things about the service of Krishna from his father.
And from the childhood, Prabhupada's father was always telling, please let him learn Mridanga,
let him learn Kirtan. And I want to make him servant of Radharani. Any saintly persons when
they would visit Srila Prabhupada's house, so Prabhupada would request them, please bless my
son so that he can become servant of Radharani. So this is real father. So real father does not
mean engaging a child in mundane education, which is but another kind of violence. Any person who
does not have good character, does not have proper understanding of life, he should not be given
education and money because he will only do sense gratification and go to hell in the next life.
So thus if you are giving education to a person, if you are giving any kind of knowledge to a
person or money to a person who does not know the science of spirit soul, who does not have proper
character, you are actually the result of his downfall, degradation. Thus the Shudras who would
not go to school, who would not show good character in the Vedic culture, they were not given education.
Because if you educate them, they will create havoc in the society. They don't show good character.
That is why you see big big scams. Everyone is cheating. More than 90% of doctors are fraud.
They are cheating the patients, corporate hospitals, judiciary is extremely corrupt,
bureaucracy is corrupt, legislature anyway we know what is happening. So entire population is full
of corruption. There is corruption within the family, within the relationship, all and when
you educate such people, they will simply create a walk in society. So that's actually we are not
doing benefit to these people, but harming these people. So this is Karma Yoga, taking care of
child so that child can become devotee of Krishna. You can offer your child in the service of Krishna.
This is Karma Yoga. This was the culture of India Bharat Varsha. That is why we have that big temple
Padmanabh Swami in South where they found many many treasure. How many rooms? I think six to seven
rooms they have found full of treasure. Very rich temple and all those kings as soon as the child
would take birth, the prince was offered to the feed of Lord Padmanabh and he was named Padmanabh
Das, Padmanabh Das one, two, three, four. So all were Padmanabh Das, the kings of Jaipur.
They declared that Govind Dev Ji, he is the king and we are the servants of Govind Dev Ji.
So this is the culture. This is called Karma Yoga. So Karma Yoga does not mean so Krishna
consciousness apparently for the new fires. A person may think that renunciation is being
taught that you leave everything and you go away. No, it is not about that. Krishna consciousness
means doing all the activities but keeping Krishna in the center. Krishna is not telling you leave
your eating. Krishna is not telling you stop sleeping. When a devotee sleeps, when a Karmic
devotee sleeps, he thinks I don't wish to do. I want to enjoy sleep. When a devotee also sleeps.
But what is devotee sleep? Devotee feels very embarrassed. Why this miserable body I've got
because of my past Karma. Even though I want the soul, I am desiring to serve Krishna continuously
but the body doesn't allow. So let me take some rest so that with refreshed energy I can engage
again in the service of Krishna. In this way the sleep of devotee is also dedicated to Krishna. So
the sleeping also becomes yoga for a devotee. Eating becomes yoga. Sleeping becomes yoga. Work
anyway he does for the pleasure of Krishna. So this is called yoga, Karma Yoga. So we may continue
our jobs. We may continue our business. We may continue taking care of our families. Rather take
best care of your families but everything should be offered to Krishna. This is Karma Yoga. And when
a person does this kind of activity then as we saw the last sloka verse number 28 of 9 chapter
a person becomes free from Shubh and Ashubh from so-called good activities and bad activities also.
And then something unique happens. Even though this world is full of misery always a person is
agitated and disturbed here but Krishna being very merciful he can immediately if he desires
he can make all the laws stop acting upon the person. So all these miseries stop immediately
for such a person who has received special mercy of Krishna. By his own endeavor it is very very
difficult to surpass these things. So now how to get that mercy of Krishna? Why Krishna will show
special mercy? Krishna is equal to everyone all are children of Krishna. Why some Jiva will get
special favor of Krishna? So that Krishna answers in the verse which we will see now. So I'll share
the screen. So Srila Prabhupada our spiritual master founder Acharya of Hare Krishna movement.
So all the discussions that we are having explanations we are having it is all
basis the teachings of his divine grace Srila Prabhupada. So now Krishna is explaining a very
very unique and extraordinary position here. What is that I will explain. Krishna explains
Krishna is telling
I am equal to all the living entities
Nobody I am envious of no one neither I am very very favorable to somebody. Oh
person's heart may get broken I am telling Krishna please help me and now Krishna is telling that no
I am equal I cannot help no but Krishna is telling to to means but there is one exception
a person who engages in bhajanti who engages in my service the devotee
I envy no one nor am I partial to anyone I am equal to all but whoever and does service unto me
in devotion is a friend is in me and I am also a friend to him. So this is the special favor of
Krishna. So anybody who becomes a devotee of Krishna Krishna becomes a friend to that person
and shows him special favor. Now people should not accuse Krishna oh why everyone is son of
everyone is part and parcel of Krishna why Krishna is favoring only one person no
Prabhupada gives example just like father he cannot tell you are very partial so many children are
there in the society why you are just feeding your son you are very partial no father it's natural
for father to feed that to feed his child yes he may take care of all the other children equally
he's a good person there is any suffering in society he'll go out and help but his child he
will give special care so thus Krishna is telling I am equal to everyone but I give special favor to
my devotee and again anybody can become a devotee it's not that Krishna puts some condition you
cannot become devotee this person this man this woman this child this old man cannot become devotee
no anybody can become devotee in that sense also Krishna is equal but as soon as a person becomes
devotee then Krishna tells he is my friend I become his friend and very important word used
in this connection is my means he lives in me he is in me as soon as a person becomes devotee a
pure devotee of Krishna so Krishna explains my that person lives in me so what does it mean living
in Krishna living in Krishna means living directly in the internal energy of Krishna
so now now we are living in the external energy of Krishna just like the cow is there and the
cow can give us some milk so that milk when it is in the body of cow it is internal energy of cow the
blood of cow and when the milk is separated from the body of cow that is still cows energy but it
is separated that is called external energy in this way this world which is made up of matter in
which we are living now in these temporary bodies this is called external energy it is not directly
controlled by Krishna so we are not living in Krishna we are living external energy all the
conditioned souls but as soon as a person becomes pure devotee of Krishna then he lives in Krishna
in Krishna means the energy which is directly coming out of Krishna's body and Krishna takes
personal care of such people just like the government takes direct care of the people who
live outside the jail and takes indirect care of the people who live inside the jail through the
jail administration so in a similar fashion when a person starts living in Krishna immediately his
life becomes the there are different laws acting upon that person is free from all these material
laws then a person is no longer disturbed by any of the miseries of this material world
Srila Roop Goswami explains this thing so generally people think and especially in India where we have
some exposure to spiritual life people think spiritual life means for getting moksha as yesterday
somebody asked that can a woman get moksha and like that so actually moksha is not the aim of
a devotee's life so moksha actually is suicidal for a devotee so it is told
moksha is like hellish situation for a devotee so what is moksha means a person has come out of
the jail and is loitering on the street he has not reached his house so it is very abominable
situation for the person so he will tell at least jail is better i had some friends i was talking
to them playing with them now i'm loitering there on the street i have no job no occupation at least
jail i was getting some food to eat so that is why pravapada tells this moksha is very abominable
situation so a person goes out and he merges in the light which is coming out of Krishna's body
because of having no positive knowledge of life the devotee merges in brahma jyoti so this moksha
is very very abominable concept of life however the devotees do not care a fig for the moksha
rather they are scared of moksha it is spiritual suicide so what is actual spiritual life actual
spiritual life means living in Krishna in the internal energy of Krishna where Krishna also
lives personally in a form having two hands and legs and also in four-handed forms on some planets
so just like we have friendship here we have a relationship here living entities having
relationship with Krishna which are of five kinds a person can be either related to Krishna in
so moksha means i am out of material misery there is no positive happiness but spiritual life means
positive happiness so spiritual world is material world is reflection of spiritual world Krishna
will explain in 15th chapter just like the dream is reflection of the reality that we see
around us same things we see in dream in a similar fashion now what we see around us it is reflection
of the spiritual world all these things are made up of pure spirit in the spiritual world so in
the spiritual world the devotees enjoy unique relationship with Krishna all all the devotees
all the souls a person can either be related to Krishna in shantaras just like a person who is
in the spiritual world he could be in the form of a stone or a tree the stone is not engaged in
direct service of Krishna but the stone is simply at one place and when Krishna comes and sits over
the stone stone derives so much of pleasure so stone is not stone is not active in service but
when Krishna is sitting upon the stone great pleasure is derived similarly the trees in the
spiritual world they also serve Krishna in a passive state the waters they serve Krishna in
a passive state when Krishna goes and sits near the water or he plunges into the water the water
the river it derives unlimited pleasure benefit the river is also a personality a living entity
this is called shantaras the pleasure of passive service and when there is advancement intensity
increases of love of Krishna then there is another mellow that is mellow that is pleasure of
like lord hanuman the devotee is very very eager to carry out the instruction of Krishna
order of Krishna so it takes unlimited pleasure in becoming servant of Krishna this is called
then when the pleasure intensifies even further there is friends of Krishna like
so they are all friends of Krishna just like we have friends here Krishna also has friends
and that pleasure is even much much more intimate do not think the pleasure which I get by hanging
around with my friends the same pleasure I will get with Krishna no that pleasure is unlimited
times more a person's heart is so full of ecstasy that sometimes the voice chokes up there are tears
coming out of the eyes and a person sometimes loses his consciousness also such unlimited
pleasure and love is there in the service of Krishna in being Krishna's servant in passive state
in as a servitor or as a friend and then there is a higher state till friend a person is dependent
upon Krishna but when the pleasure even further intensifies then that is called so actually
Krishna is hankering for especially this pleasure more Krishna is taking care of the entire world
and when a person reaches this platform means parental relationship he becomes anxious to take
care of Krishna Krishna becomes dependent upon his devotee so that is why deity worship is very
very important so deity worship trains us in this mood of taking care of Krishna Krishna is standing
there at one place I am hungry unless you eat me unless you feed me I will not eat so you should be
very cautious so it is time for offering I am getting late let me offer to Krishna oh it is a
season for mango let me offer mango to Krishna Krishna will enjoy eating mangoes in this way a
person develops parental relationship with Krishna whole world is dependent upon Krishna Krishna
becomes dependent upon his devotee so this kind of pleasure Krishna enjoys a lot I should also
be in charge of someone someone should be anxious about me and when the pleasure intensifies further
that is called conjugal love madhura rasa the pleasure the relationship between Krishna and
the gopis of Vrindavan that is very very high extraordinary kind of relationship so even moksha
is also actually violence and sense gratification moksha is actually spiritual suicide which people
do not know moksha means you will not you will leave your material body also you will not develop
spiritual body also although leaving material body will bring you out of harassment but there
is no positive spiritual life and simply a person keeps on floating like a spiritual particle in the
spiritual world so this is spiritual suicide you could have enjoyed with Krishna but then you did
not do that so that is why the devotees tell this this moksha it is like hell and actually this
person's heart is also not very pure so sometimes we take spiritual life for our personal peace of
mind but this is also maya so spiritual if you are seeking peace of mind that is also sense
gratification on mental level so I want my peace of mind again tendency to enjoy is there and
tendency to please Krishna is not there so that is why this is not real where agya this kind of
where agya arjuna was willing to have that Krishna let me give up my duties I don't want to fight
so he was willing to go for peace of mind but no this is not real renunciation some people they
leave their house leave their duties they go to Himalayas so it is told by Rupa Goswami he quotes
the vedas a person whose mind is materially contaminated and he cannot see everything
is property of Krishna so what does he do he's aspiring for getting moksha in his life and he
leaves all such things this is called false renunciation this is called false renunciation
is not real where agya he is thinking that let me leave this house all these people around me
and let me go to Himalayas this is wrong where agya it means you are thinking my house does not
belong to me my car my office does not belong to me but Himalayas belong to me I will live in
Himalayas I will eat fruits from all the trees in Himalayas because the trees of Himalayas belong
to me no so this is called wrong renunciation so Prabhupada gives very nice example somebody is
walking in front of Bank of America and then he tells looking at Bank of America I have left this
Bank of America I renounce was it your father's property Prabhupada's Bank of America when did
it belong to you you are renouncing now no it's in a similar fashion when did members of your
family belong to you when did your house belong to you when did your money belong to you just like a
cashier may foolishly think all this money which I am collecting belongs to me a soul in ignorance
thinks the money which I am producing the people who are around me my property it belongs to me it
is not the property does the kings in the Bhagavatam they are telling when the brahmanas approach them
actually all this thing the entire kingdom that we possess it is not our property it is a property
of the brahmanas we are simply the custodians does any brahmana whenever he would go for charity
the king will give charity whatever he wants even if the he may want the life of king the king will
lay down his life this called king's position does Bali Maharaj when he was asked Bali Maharaj
offered his own self you kill me or you keep me I off I am offering entire property and myself also
in your service without any hesitation because they understand it is not my property brahmanas
are representatives of God and thus everything too should be surrendered unto the brahmanas it
is not my property just like the kings of Jaipur or Padmanabh Swami that place they told we are
servant of Padmanabh this entire kingdom belongs to Padmanabh even now if you go to temples
the entire property village town or city is in the name of Krishna so much land of Jagannath
Puri is in the name of Jagannath now the government has taken a lot of land so much land in the is in
the name of Finaji in Nath Dvara so Krishna is the land holder and everyone is servant this concept
is missing in the society so this is called wrong virage when did it belong to you that you are
leaving those things and you are thinking forest or the mountain belongs to you that you can live
there peacefully no sir nothing belonged to you in the first place so this is called although it is
better than materialist but it is imperfect enunciation then what is renunciation perfection
of spiritual life is to develop renunciation develop what is that then what I am supposed
to develop in spiritual life so Rup Goswami mentions very nice important verse sorry I took
today also a little long I'll finish in two three minutes with this shloka so Rup Goswami tells
what is actually devotee's aspiration what is that knowledge where agya is supposed to develop
so Rup Goswami mentions quoting the vedas
a person who is engaged now in the service of Krishna how he's engaged in service of Krishna
a person is engaged in the service of Karmana with his actions and with actions he's serving Krishna
mind something else he's planning no mind also should be thinking of Krishna and with his voice
also with mind body and speech he's engaged in the service of Krishna in all the circumstances
at all times he is engaged in service of Krishna he is liberated even though he is now living in
in the so-called material body but don't think that he is a conditioned soul he is liberated
personality so anybody who with his actions his mind and his speech he is engaged in service of
Krishna he is liberated just like a person who is in jail he cannot pick up a government job can he
pick up a prisoner no he can pick up some job in the jail as soon as a person is engaged in the job
of government even though he is living within the jail he is liberated just like all those people in
the jail all the constables the jailer the inspector they are not conditioned souls because
they are doing government job over there so as soon as somebody is doing government job even though
he's living in the jail he is not prisoner of the jail in a similar fashion the vedas still
Roop Goswami quotes in Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu as soon as you engage always in the service of Krishna
with actions with mind and with your words chanting the name of Krishna thinking of Krishna and with
your skills you do those skills use those skills in the service of Krishna immediately you are
liberated because only liberated soul can serve Krishna so in this world you are engaged in service
of Krishna and what is the result of that service the result of that service is just like now we
engage in some service mother is feeding the child taking trouble of cooking in the kitchen why
because there is some pleasure of the heart the person is taking care of his pet nicely why because
there is some pleasure of the heart similarly just like there are pleasures in serving dogs
serving cat serving grad serving father serving children serving society there is some pleasure
similarly there is some pleasure when a living entity engages in service of Krishna and that
pleasure is unlimited ever increasing extraordinary and always satisfying to the heart and in that
pleasure there is no other demand of a person a person stops being a person need not serve anyone
in this material world he not be servant of eyes he not be servant of ears he will not be servants
of his tongue belly or genitals no power of this world can engage that person in his service he's
completely liberated because he's completely satisfied so he's liberated now and as soon
as this body is gone he goes back to live with Krishna so this Krishna is promising here this
stage is possible for a devotee mayi as soon as a devotee does this thing he offers all the results
to Krishna he whatever the food he's eating he's eating remnants of Krishna whatever tapasya is
doing he is doing for Krishna he becomes a devotee and when he becomes a devotee mayi he is living in
Krishna although apparently in this material world he is enjoying unlimited ecstasy and bliss
so this is instruction of rajvidya so confidential people are aspiring for dharma artha moksha it
takes you to a situation which is must beyond moksha so that moksha becomes very very substandard
life for a devotee so this is rajvidya the most confidential knowledge so remaining four five
very very important verses are still there that we will try to cover in the remaining classes
so i'll finish here today's class and let us take some questions others you can please carry on
sometimes i'm sorry i'm taking maybe i'll change the time from 8 40 to 8 50 or something
so others they can please carry on and i will stay here to discuss some questions and we will
chant Hare Krishna Maha Mantra also 9 15 to 9 20 is it then wrong to do service to children or
people who are abandoned or rejected by society by helping them with education or career options
or handicapped people without any selfish intention so as we discussed with or without selfish
intention suppose you give gun to a child what will the child do just like the news was there
some time back unfortunately a small child killed his own mother because child was just playing
around with the gun which was there i think in the bag of the mother or somewhere the gun got
shot and the mother was killed on the spot so that's giving gun in the child in the hand of
a child is very very dangerous so this knowledge this education is power and if the person is not
showing good character he will spoil himself he will do sense enjoyment without any restriction
and thus he is creating hellish life for him so thus without giving him good character in
krishna consciousness if you give him education that is violence upon the person and should not
be done so krishna consciousness is first thing so you please educate that is important you tell
him how to make a living but more and most importantly give krishna consciousness and
without krishna consciousness very dangerous without krishna consciousness a person this is
the shloka
if you cannot stop the death of other person you have no right to become father mother relative or
even guru so you cannot impart any education also to other person unless you're confident i will
stop his deaths because this education will entangle him cycle of more and more karma thus
please do not indulge yourself in this material world do not produce children if you cannot make
them krishna conscious you cannot stop their death do not become teacher if you cannot make your
words krishna conscious so thus it is important as per shastras whether we can offer water to
tulsi marani on eka dashi when one should not offer water to tulsi marani prabhu what principal
duties to be followed in grahastha life to continue krishna consciousness kindly guide me regarding
the same we can offer water to tulsi marani every day morning and evening before sunset till sunset
you can offer and what are the principal eka dashi also we can offer what are the principal
duties to be followed in grahastha life so like chatani maha prabhu told the duty of grahastha is
to always chant Hare Krishna maha mantra and engage in the service of preachers the vaishnavas the
devotees so by serving the devotees helping them in the preaching mission and chanting the
Hare Krishna mantra always incessantly that is the duty of a householder grahastha more practical
guidance you can please take from the devotee who is in touch with you his divine grishila pravapada
writes in the purport of 20th shloka of second chapter that the soul has no past present and
future but we are learning that according to our past karma we will get new material body so what
is the real understanding behind this please guide us prabhuji because the soul is eternal
therefore there is no question of past present and future for this and as long as the soul is
there in material world it lives under the hallucination of past present and future just
like when we go into dream we create a past present and future which is hallucinatory
it does not exist just like in dream sometimes we think oh in the past i did like that and now
i'm seeing it where was the past it all started in the dream so in a similar fashion past present
and future now is hallucinatory the soul is eternal doesn't the butcher's benediction also
applies to all the meat eaters yes i want to know why japa mala having 108 beads and why chanting 16
mala and not other numbers there are 108 upanishads shlila prabhupada explains in teachings of lord
chatanya book so when we are chanting Hare Krishna mantra it means signifies we are getting knowledge
of all the upanishads which are 108 and there are 108 prime gopis of Krishna so we are engaging in
their service when we are chanting Hare Krishna mantra on all these 108 beads this is why we have
108 why are chanting 16 mala and not other numbers because our aim of life is to please prabhupada
and in this way get success of spiritual life so ultimately you have to please Krishna now you can
please Krishna directly also how we can please Krishna directly that Krishna is explained over
there you leave all the duties and surrender completely unto me and 24 hours you have to
chant so can we do that can we chant 24 hours always leaving all the duties aside not possible
now so thus understanding the fallen state the acharyas give some rules and regulations which
the conditioned souls at that particular time place circumstance can follow thus various acharyas
who are pure devotees of krishna pegambar mohammad lord jesus christ all of them they came
shri guru nanak dev ji they all came and they gave instruction as per time place and circumstances
so if you want krishna consciousness in perfection we have to please a pure devotee of krishna
so that is a prabhupada being a pure devotee if we simply follow his instruction
he will make sure that we become perfect in our krishna consciousness so when we
chant 16 rounds perfectly shri prabhupada will make sure we get all the krishna consciousness
he will request krishna on our behalf and we will get it thus krishna tells in bhagavati in
which puran it is in bhagavatam or somewhere else so he tells mad bhakteshu pujya bhyadhika
greater than my worship is worship of my devotees because pleasing me directly is very difficult
but my devotee very easily becomes pleased he's very compassionate so that is why we chant 16
rounds because prabhupada has promised if you chant 16 rounds i will take you back to godhead
when you say a devotee i get happy but then you say pure devotee and all my dreams get shattered
yes so this state is not possible for an ordinary devotee a neophyte devotee we have to become pure
devotee but it is not very difficult if you follow the rules and regulations nicely all of us can
become pure devotee so simply keep on following the rules and regulations as devotees are telling
you so whosoever devotee is in touch with you he is guiding you please follow him exactly what
he's telling and then you also will become pure devotee prabhuji if our senses permit what should
one ask from krishna at the time of death liberation no this is business we don't do business for
for krishna we simply want to serve krishna for his pleasure so devotee has no personal
desire either for material or for any pleasure devotee simply wants to serve krishna no desire
and if krishna not a person krishna is a person when he sees this person never asks anything
he's always willing to engage in my service krishna will offer himself to the devotee
so devotee should never ask anything from krishna simply service of krishna
at while he is living or at death i am doing bhakti all day reading shreemad bhagavatam doing
chanting mangala arati for the whole day but at the end of the day the desiring of playing
pubg or watching movies for my sense gratification is always there how can we reduce or remove if
possible these desires so i will explain this tomorrow so please do remind me sometimes there
are some vaishnavas some good god brothers whose behavior is very irritating at the same time
they are doing good bhakti how can we deal with such vaishnavas without doing vaishnava prad
so this look also we are going to discuss either in next class i think next class only we are going
to discuss this thing so krishna gives direct answer in this chapter to this so we will
definitely discuss this question also Hare Krishna prabhuji prabhuji how to practice
continuing grahastha life so i explained just like Srila prabhu's father practiced he was
completely detached and every householder is supposed to take care of his family members
and he also took care of his family members but the purpose was to make the family members devotee
of krishna and even despite our best efforts family members do not become devotees of krishna
it is in our hand to ourselves become pure devotee if we just we become pure devotee
are many many generations which are going to come and which have come before us they will
automatically become devotees they'll get liberated so it is very very simple so this is how a
householder can do so that is why grahastha vanaprastha sannyasi brahmachari krishna consciousness
man woman it is same for everyone chant and hear the names of krishna and preach to others
what you have understood as simple as that and everyone can follow that
so
today's class is very nice my question today class you told about duty service related eight
hours only result expectation but material life office hours is not eight hours week
minimum 10 hours or 11 hours in this situation how is applied bhagavad gita in current material
life or how do we get relief from material life to your skin
so
so just like people do tiktok facebook and all these things in office so you can read
bhagavatam preach and chant in the office very very nicely just like our mayank is there in pune
so he goes to office and then he preaches krishna consciousness his boss is asking
i don't find you on the chair what are you what are you doing in office
so he's sitting with somebody and preaching krishna consciousness so you are in office also
for a long time but you are preaching they are also becoming devotees and good thing in office
is they cannot run away from all from you also they have to listen so in this way you spend
good time in office and preach krishna consciousness and we thought that is also not possible boss is
standing on the head sitting next to you then leave that job krishna will find help you to
find a good job so don't leave immediately chant very nicely whatever time you are having now
pray to krishna krishna will arrange prabhupada writes in bhagavatam when krishna's devotee wants
to engage his time in service of krishna krishna gives inspiration from the heart how to find a
proper job eight hours is maximum we can even minimize so i've never seen a devotee struggling
very very hard in his job not able to manage no krishna makes the devotee's life very easily very
nice but a person is a sincere preacher who is trying to preach krishna consciousness serve
krishna nicely krishna makes his life easy so materially also he's taken care very nicely
so as of now whatever time you are getting chained nicely read nicely and pray to krishna
preach and krishna will arrange favorable situation keep finding a good job in which
you get more time why are all the gods born in india why didn't they go to other countries
why didn't hinduism spread to foreign countries so india we have defined now
just like somebody may ask why god come in pakistan pakistan came into existence after 1947
before that it was india only similarly this entire country was called bharat varsha we have
defined india means this small piece of land now but yes geographically this situation which is
called bharat varsha just like you cannot tell why stephen hawking comes to iac why he doesn't go
to sabji mandi so why he'll go to sabji mandi who will understand him there so that is why krishna
will go there where people understand him and people are waiting for him so all the devotees
of krishna they live in this portion are ivarta bharat varsha so krishna goes to please his
devotees that is why krishna appears on this part why didn't hinduism spread to foreign countries
because foreign countries mainly those people did not want so one old woman was there and she asked
uh when prabhupada gave lecture she became overwhelmed and started crying and she asked
prabhupada why you have come so late why didn't you come before so prabhupada told because you
were not ready before so when the living entity does not desire krishna consciousness krishna
will facilitate his desire for material enjoyment but now we can see there was some arrangement and
now krishna consciousness has spread across the world
