Today's topic is the Deity who was a witness.
So although we will be connecting with this topic, with Rajmaraj's prayers only,
but since it is something which is very important for us to understand,
those who are following Krishna Consciousness, following these teachings of Krishna Consciousness,
what is this Deity worship and how to understand the concept of Deity worship,
how we can practically understand that so-called matter can take a position of Lord.
So we will discuss that with the Prahlad Maharaja's prayers.
So this is 7.9.21. With this we will be covering this and we will be hearing very nice pastimes of Sakshi Gopal Ji.
So this Deity what you are seeing on screen is a very famous Deity of Sakshi Gopal Ji.
You will find this temple in Odisha, Kattak.
Some of you would have visited this place. It's called Sakshi Gopal Ji in Kattak.
And the entire pastime what we are going to discuss today is about this Deity of Sakshi Gopal Ji.
And session is dedicated to His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swamiji.
So let us read this verse and then we will discuss this pastime also.
Prahlad Maharaja is praying here.
Oh Lord, supreme eternal, by expanding your penury portion you have created the subtle bodies of the living entities
through the agency of your external energy, which is agitated by time.
Thus the mind entraps the living entity in unlimited varieties of desires
to be fulfilled by Vedic directions of karma, khanda, food and activities.
And the sixteen elements who can get free from this entanglement,
Alex, he takes shelter at your lotus feet.
And last session if you remember we had discussed how a person can take direction from the Lord.
And we discussed that Lord actually directs the living entity as per His desire.
Whatever desire a living entity has based on his three modes of material nature,
whatever desire he or she may develop, accordingly Lord directs.
And definitely if a person is having some wrong desire, Lord will direct him that we should not do that.
But still the person is, if he is very, very much adamant, I want to do that,
then Lord will give all the facility also how to do that.
And today's verse Prahlad Maharaja is praying.
He is telling a person, this material world, that body is what we have created is basically by the energy of the Lord.
And one of the subtle body is mind.
And mind interrupts the living entities with a kind of desires.
And which is mentioned in the scriptures, Vedic scriptures, karma, khanda portion, how to fulfill the desire.
And as you remember in one of the session also we had discussed earlier what is the karma, khanda portion.
Karma, khanda portion is one of the part of the Vedic literature
which talks about doing some kind of activities like performing some yajna, ritual ceremonies
so that a person can fulfill his material desire.
Just like to perform yajna to satisfy some particular demigod or some rituals
so that we can satisfy our material desire.
That is footy activities are called karma, khanda portion.
Now, very important thing, it is here to understand Prahlad Maharaja is saying,
who can get free from this entanglement unless you take shelter at your lotus feet.
Till that time a person takes the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord,
he cannot actually come out of this entanglement of material world.
And as we understand many times we discussed this material world is very very bewildering.
A person may be very very intelligent, he would have done a lot of research in this material field of activities
but still he won't be able to understand the nature of this material world.
That's why people are bewildered how things are working in this material world.
How many things which are beyond our imagination, beyond our calculation,
things are happening here in this material world.
Although as per our advancement of science, advancement of technology, we may try many things.
We may develop big weapons and all the technologies so that we can save ourselves.
But some natural disaster comes, something comes because of that.
Everything, whatever we have designed with so much of hard labor, everything will get destroyed.
Just like we saw in Japan, so many earthquakes are happening and so many wars are happening.
So we may try many many things but if nature does not permit then we cannot do anything.
So that's why it is very very important as to understand how to come out of this entanglement.
And for this entanglement, the living entities those who are in this material world,
to make them, to keep them out of this entanglement, Krishna devised various means and plans.
Just like a father, if a father's son is not in a good position,
and real father will try to make sure that somehow the other son should come back to the normal condition.
Similarly, Krishna also, he devises various ways and means so that living entity and somehow the other can again get attracted towards Krishna.
So actually, sometimes people ask this question, they have this understanding that this Krishna consciousness
or this Hare Krishna mantra and the scorn people what they are doing is basically you are doing brainwashing.
This is a very famous word that they use with scorn that they are doing brainwashing.
So one time one person asked Prabhupada that it has been told that you are brainwashing.
Among youngsters you are spreading this message, you are brainwashing.
So Prabhupada says, yes, you are doing brainwashing, your brain is full of dirt, so much of dirty things.
So we are washing your brain so that you can understand ultimately what should be done.
So actually it is not brainwashing. Yes, brainwashing in one sense, so much of dirty things are in the brain which should be washed.
But this answer we get from Krishnadas Kaviraj Goswami, very nicely he says.
He says in Chetan Saritamrita that
That means this Krishna consciousness, the Krishna bhakti is actually not something which is enforced on the living entity.
It is not like that and Prabhupada also writes that it is not an artificial imposition on the mind.
No, artificially you cannot make a present devotee of Krishna.
It is a natural tendency of a living entity but somehow because we are in touch with matter,
we are not in touch with spirit, we are in touch with matter.
That's why that natural tendency is not coming out.
Just like if there is a mirror and that mirror there is so much of dust is there, you won't be able to see your face properly,
although you are in front of the mirror.
Similarly, right now because of our contaminated stage, we are in contaminated position,
we are not able to understand the importance of this Krishna consciousness movement.
So it is not artificial, it is just that there is a covering.
And the more we follow this process, the covering further we will get.
Right now the covering is very thick because of past many, many lives.
It's not that of this life.
It is of many, many past lives that covering is there.
So this covering, the thickness of the covering will be reduced when we follow this process.
And Krishna time and again comes in this material world through his repress.
Sometimes he himself comes, sometimes sends his representatives so that living entities were bewildered going around here and there.
And somehow or the other, take some attention, give some attention to Krishna's past time, Krishna's activities.
So actually in this material world also you see everyone is after one thing.
Everyone is after, for example, Google. Google is after what?
Google is after your attention. Facebook is after your attention. Instagram is after your attention.
So everyone, everyone in this world is actually after our attention, the consumer's attention.
That's why you see, you just open YouTube, you'll find many suggested videos.
You never ask for suggested videos, but still they are giving you suggested videos.
You search some, about some product on Google.
Next day onwards you will see many, many suggestions will come for that product automatically.
You never ask for, maybe by mistake you would have time to watch.
Next time you will see so many handwatches will come.
So now everyone is after our attention. Everyone, without any doubt.
Because attention is something which is a living entity's property.
It is our property. Where actually we are going to give our attention, that is our property.
Another way it is called is free will. That where we want to go, that is our free will.
So now Krishna is telling the attention what you are given to this material world, material energy.
Krishna comes time and again so that this attention can again be pulled back and again can be posted to, for Krishna Consciousness.
So that's why he comes time and again with many, many incarnations.
Whatever you are saying is out of topic, right?
So please have some patience.
We will discuss that also.
So that's the mind we were discussing here.
So Krishna comes many, many times to take a living entity out of this material world.
And sometime he comes as incarnation.
He comes as Lord Narasimhadeva, Lord Ramachandra and Matassa incarnation, Vaman incarnation.
Like that many, many incarnations it takes so that he can take a living entity towards again back to God, back to God, back to God, towards Krishna again.
And one of the incarnations, just like we hear about Holy Name of the Lord, Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
Hare Krishna Maha Mantra is also one of the incarnations of the Lord.
The only purpose is that so that these living entities can again go back to Him.
So that's why any incarnation is very, very compassionate.
And one of the incarnations, similar incarnation of the Lord is Deity incarnation.
Deity incarnation means any Deity which is authorized, which is Krishna's Deity, which is coming down in proper system.
It is that Krishna Himself is present there.
He is incarnate just like Lord Ramachandra, He is personally there.
Similarly, that Deity incarnation of the Lord also is personally, Krishna Himself is present there.
And that's a different thing with our material senses.
We won't be able to see that.
So that's why many times people, they criticize also Deity worship
because they don't have proper understanding how a stone or matter can be worshiped.
They have this understanding how you can worship stone, how you can worship matter.
But they don't understand that so-called stone or matter also energy of Krishna.
As we discussed in the last session, that matter or spirit, this is material energy, this is spiritual energy, this is for our consideration.
We say this is matter, this is spirit.
But actually for Krishna, everything is His energy.
Just like for government, Buddhist department is also one of the department, energy of the government
and finance department is also one of the energy of the government.
Similarly, for Krishna, material energy is also one of the energy of Krishna and spiritual energy is also one of the energy of Krishna.
So for Him, it is nothing as spiritual and material.
But for us, it is material and spiritual.
So-called matter is also can be, Krishna can make in spirit. It is possible.
But for them, we need to understand that right now with our conditional stage, we won't be able to understand that.
So today we will discuss one of such very nice pastime which happened.
It is mentioned in Chaitanya Charita Amrita.
How for a devotee, for a pure devotee, Krishna make that exception.
Generally you will see you go to temple, you will not see Deity walking out of the temple.
But for a devotee of the Lord, Deity has travelled from one place to another, from Vrindavan to South India, Vidyanagar.
So that we will discuss this pastime today.
So what we will do, we will read this pastime.
It is in Chaitanya Charita Amrita.
So we will read summary of that pastime.
At the same time in between also we will read some of the quotes.
In quotes, Prabhupada talks about Deities.
Because it is very, very important for us that we have a proper context what we are understanding.
That's why Padma Purana says,
The person who thinks that the Deity of Vishnu is made of a stone.
And Guru Sunarmati understands that spiritual master is a normal human being.
And Vaishnava belongs to some particular caste, current religion.
He will become ultimately resident of hell.
That is mentioned in Padma Purana.
So that means the Deity of Vishnu should not be considered as normal, like stone.
Not like that.
We may not be able to perceive the material senses.
So Krishna comes in an incarnation in the form so that we can perceive and see.
So Prabhupada writes here,
So actually it depends how much pure we are.
The person more pure he is, the more he can have the reciprocation of the Lord in the form of Deity.
Same in the form of Purnima also.
But even though we are not free from sins, the Lord is kind enough to allow us the facility of seeing him in this archa murti in the temple.
The Lord is all-powerful and therefore he is also able to accept our service by presentation of his archa form.
No one therefore should foolishly think that the archa in the temple to be an idol.
Such an archa murti is not an idol but the Lord himself.
And to the proportion to which one is freed from sins, he is able to know the significance of the archa murti.
The guidance of pure devotee therefore is always required.
So this is like Ramo Rajacharya is in South India if you have heard.
Many many pastimes he has performed with deities.
Generally we will see pastimes, devotees doing many many leelas with our living entities.
But Ramo Rajacharya has many many pastimes with the deities.
And for the Ramo Rajacharya deities that come out of altar, they have done many many things for the devotee.
So like that one pastime is there in Chaitanya Charitamrita.
We are discussing this and I am going to share my screen now.
It is the summary of that pastime and because we don't have sufficient time, we will be discussing whatever is most important.
And in between, sometime we will also read some of the quotes of Srila Prabhupada.
So this pastime is like that.
At Vidyanagar in South India there were once two brahmanas who decided to make a long tour to see different places of pilgrimage.
First they visited Gaya, then Kashi, then Prayag.
Finally with great pleasure they came to Mathura.
There they visited all twelve forests of Vrindavan, saw Govardhan Hill and last came to the town of Vrindavan itself.
In Vrindavan, at the site where Govinda temple is now situated, there was at that time another great temple where gorgeous worship of the Lord Gokala was performed.
When the pilgrims visited the temple, the beauty of the Gokalati stole away their minds and feeling great happiness, they remained there for a few days.
One of the two brahmanas was an old man and the other was young.
Because the young brahmana always rendered service to the older one, the old man was very pleased with him.
So it is very clear that the two brahmanas were there, they went for a tour and ultimately there is Mathura, Vrindavan and there was one brahmana who was old and another brahmana who was young.
And the young brahmana rendered nice services to the old brahmana.
Old brahmana became very very pleased with him and then he told, now what you told that I will give my daughter to you as a charity.
You can marry my daughter.
So I will just read whatever important it is.
The young brahmana, sorry, after they stayed in Gopal temple, the older man told the younger, you have rendered various types of services to me.
You have assisted me in travelling to all these places of pilgrimage.
Even my own son does not render me such service.
By your mercy, I did not fatigue you while on this tour.
If I do not show any respect, I would be ungrateful.
Therefore, I promise to give my daughter you in charity.
The young brahmana replied.
So the young brahmana is knowing what he is saying.
The old brahmana, what he is saying is something very significant.
The young brahmana is telling, my dear sir, please hear me.
You are saying something very unusual.
Such a thing never happens.
While you are a most aristocratic family, well educated and very rich, I am not at all aristocratic indeed.
I am without a decent education, have no wealth.
Sir, I am not suitable bridegroom for your daughter.
I render service to you only for the satisfaction of Krishna.
Lord Krishna is very pleased by service rendered to brahmanas.
And when Lord is pleased, the opulence of one's devotional service increases.
That's why it is mentioned how important it is to please brahmanas.
Well, Krishna says in Bhagavatam also that wherever brahmana is worshipped, brahmana is pleased.
Krishna is also very much pleased.
Krishna eats through the mouth of brahmanas.
It is mentioned.
But the brahmana should also have all the qualification of brahmana.
Not that anybody can claim brahmana just by taking birth.
You should have that qualification also.
The older brahmana replied.
My dear boy, do not doubt me.
I shall give you my daughter in charity.
For I have already decided this.
The young brahmana said.
You have a wife and sons and you have a large circuit of relatives and friends.
Without their consent, you cannot possibly give me your daughter in charity.
My daughter is my own property, said the elderly brahmana.
If I choose to give my property to someone who has the power to stop me.
My dear boy, I shall give my daughter to you in charity and I shall ignore the position of all others.
Do not doubt me in this regard.
Just accept my proposal.
The young brahmana replied.
If you have actually decided to give your daughter to me, then say so before the Gopal Deity.
So now the young brahmana said.
If you really want to give me your daughter, then you should take a vow in front of Gopal Deity.
So that tomorrow you may not say no for this promise.
Coming before Gopal Deity, the Lord, the elderly brahmana said.
My dear Lord, please witness that I have given my daughter to this boy.
Now he has made a promise in front of the deity that I have given my daughter to this boy.
In India, the custom is to honor any promise made before the deity.
Such a promise cannot be canceled.
In Indian villages, whenever there is a quarrel between two parties, they go to a temple to settle it.
Whatever is spoken in front of the deity is taken to be true.
For no one would dare lie before the deity.
But still there was in villages and all, still this concept was there that people used to firmly believe deities.
Now anyway, this concept is not there.
People don't believe. They don't go to temple at all.
So what to speak of taking one from the deities.
The younger brahmana addressed the deity saying.
The younger brahmana addressed the deity saying.
My dear Lord, you are witness. You are my witness.
You are my witness. If necessary, I shall call you to testify later on.
So brahmana is saying, if required, I'll call you in future.
After this talk, the two brahmanas started for a home.
As usual, young brahmana accompanied the elderly brahmana as if the older man were his guru, spiritual master, and rendered service to him in various ways.
Upon arriving in Vidyanagar, Vidyanagar is a place from which these two brahmanas came.
Each brahmana went to his respective home.
After some time, the elderly brahmana became very anxious.
He began to think, I have given my word to brahmana in a holy place and what I promised will certainly come to pass.
I must now disclose this to my wife, sons, and other relatives and friends.
Thus, the elderly brahmana called for a meeting of all his relatives and friends.
And before them, he narrated what had taken place in front of the Gopal.
When those who belonged to the family circle heard the narration of the old brahmana,
they made exclamations showing their disappointment and requested that he not make such proposal again.
Then, unilaterally agreed, if you agree, if you offer your daughter to a degraded family, your aristocracy will be lost.
When people hear of this, they will make jokes and laugh at you.
The elderly brahmana said, how can I undo the promise I made in a holy place while on pilgrimage?
Whatever may happen, I must give my daughter to the young brahmana.
So, this is the situation that brahmana is trying to tell the family members that I am going to give my daughter to this younger brahmana and family members are against him.
Once again, the relatives were unanimous.
If you give your daughter to that boy, we shall give up all connection with you.
Indeed, his wife and sons declared, if such a thing happens, we shall take poison and die.
So, for a brahmana, it's a very, very rare situation.
On one side, there are families, family members are there, they are trying, we will take poison.
On the other side, his promise is there.
The elderly brahmana said, if I do not give my daughter to the young brahmana, he will call Sri Bhopal Ji as a witness.
Thus, he will take my daughter by force and in that case, my religious principles will become meaningless.
So, brahmana has that faith that ultimately, if I don't say yes to that brahmana, he will call the Gopal Deity here.
The old man's son replied, Deity may be a witness, but he is in a distant country.
How can he come to bear the witness against you? Why are you so anxious over this?
Besides, you do not have to flatly deny you spoke such a thing.
There is no need to make false statements. Simply say that you don't remember what you said and I shall take care of the rest.
By argument, I shall defeat the young brahmana.
So, now the brother is telling that you need not to tell a lie.
You can simply tell, I do not remember what I said actually and then I will take care of the rest of the things.
The old man's son replied,
The son of the elderly brahmana was an atheist. Consequently, he did not believe in the spiritual position of the Deity nor did he have any faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
As a typical idol worshiper, he considered the form of the Lord to be made of stone or wood.
Then he assured his father that the witness was only a stone deity and was not capable of speaking.
Besides that, he assured his father that the deity was situated far away and consequently could not come to bear witness.
So, till now what we have discussed that this brahmana has promised that I am going to give you my daughter.
After coming back, all the family members, they were against him.
They told how is it possible that can you give this duty to a brahmana who is a very poor person?
And you cannot do this. If you do this, we will die. We will take poison and die.
And then when finally this brahmana is in dilemma, what should I do?
Should I say, yes, I had given this promise or should I say no?
And then further we will discuss, but we will read one very nice quote on duty worship by Sheila Prabhupada.
So, this is very important so that we can understand.
In our present state of imperfect material existence, we cannot see the Supreme Lord due to imperfect vision.
Yet those devotees who want to see Him by means of material vision are favored by the Lord who appears in a so-called material form to accept His devotee service.
So, actually Prabhupada says one place very nice that Krishna is so merciful that right now we are actually not able to even chant Hare Krishna mantra also properly.
So, Krishna is somebody simply goes to a temple and simply sits in front of the deity and simply sees the deity.
He may not be able to philosophically understand that there is a deity, Himself is God and everything.
He is simply going and sitting in front of the deities and simply appreciating this fact that so nicely the Lord is documented.
He will also get benefit. So, that's why temples are very much required.
All the Goswamis, if you see Vrindavan, which is our best law of philosophy and this time, six Goswamis and other Goswamis, they had their personal duty.
So, another Goswami has Madan Mohan, Rupa Goswami has Govind Dev Ji.
Like that other devotees also Goswamis have their duty they used to worship.
So, this deity worship was very, very important, specially when in this age of Kali Yuga where people don't have any understanding, higher understanding of spiritual knowledge.
So, for them, it is very, very important. Simply they see the deities, their mind will become purified.
So, that's why whenever you go to some Skone temple, generally you will see Prabhupada has set a very high standard for deity worship and that includes even cleanliness also.
So, generally when people, they go to Skone temple, they have a very nice experience. Why so? Because temple hall is very nicely decorated.
So, much of fragrance is there and nicely beautifully decorated.
So, as soon as a person enters in temple hall, his mind becomes sanctified because ultimately he is touching deity, he is touching Lord, maybe unknowingly he is touching Lord because he is seeing that form of the Lord.
Although he is not aware that the form is standing in front of him, Krishna himself, but even unknowingly he sees and appreciates the Lord, then he is touching the Lord through his mind.
So, that's why it is very, very important to have a deity worship program.
Further Prabhupada is telling,
So, we cannot see spirit, we can see only matter. So, Krishna says, okay, you can see matter, I will come in the form of matter and then you can see him, you can worship him.
And so nicely it is engaged actually, those who have done, maybe I don't know how many of you are aware.
If you have done any time deity service in the sense, if you have made deity, you have dressed them, you have done nice abhishekam of the deities, decoration of the deities, your mind gets totally absorbed in that.
Totally absorbed, so much so that you don't realize how much time has passed. Sometimes it happens in life, we are doing some activity where there is so much of absorption is there.
It happens like, so that time you don't realize how much time has gone actually.
But here the same thing is happening with the Lord. Two hours you are doing deity service, deity dressing and everything, so nicely you are decorating Lord.
You are totally absorbed in the Lord's form, Lord's activities and mind has become purified like anything.
That's why Prabhupada says, the more nicely you decorate deities, the more nicely your heart will be cleansed.
So Krishna is giving many opportunities, like prasadam is also one of the opportunities.
If a person is not able to do anything simply with prasadam, he will get opportunity for getting more prasadam and one finding will become a deity also.
So like the different incarnations of the Lord are available, so that living and somehow or the other, he can touch Lord.
But we are so unfortunate, what is unfortunate or careless that we don't care for that.
The Lord in the temple in the worshipable form is never to be considered to be made of stone and wood.
For the Lord is in His archa-incarnation as a deity and the temple shows immense favor to the fallen souls by His auspicious presence.
By the hearing process, as mentioned here before, this realization of the presence of the Lord in temple is made possible.
So very important thing Prabhupada is telling, you can actually understand the presence of the Lord in the temple in the form of a deity by hearing.
So many times people they go to some pilgrimages and all, they go to Vrindavan, they go to many places, South India also some places.
They go to many temples. But what they will do, they will go to temple, they will go in front of the Lord, they will come back.
Again they will go to the temple and they will go in front of the deity and they will come back.
But at least these people are pious, they are going to temples and better than these people those are atheists.
But still the real realization of the dham, any dham you go, any place you go, spiritual place, happens not because of going many places, it happens because of hearing.
So that's why you cannot see God with your eyes, you can see God by your ears.
So any dham, for example Vrindavan you are going. If you are simply roaming around here and there, you are not hearing about Lord, you are not hearing Krishna Katha.
That means although in one sense it is okay, at least you are going to dham, but you are not able to take, you won't be able to take the full benefit of that place.
Still the time is here, it is known nicely. Suppose if you go to some place called Vrindavan, let's say.
So instead of going to many many places, we have this tendency to go to many many places.
Let me see this temple also, let me see that temple also.
Although we may not know anything about the temple, simply we will go to many many temples.
You do one thing, you just sit down one time and before going to any temple, just hear about the temple or hear about Krishna nicely from the list of Srila Prabhupada.
Then you go and have darshan of the temple, you will have a different experience altogether.
Because you have heard about Lord, that background understanding is there that I am going in front of the Lord, Lord Krishna himself is present.
Right now we may be going many many temples, but we don't have understanding that in front of Deity I am standing.
So Deity is Krishna himself present. We may be taking selfie with the Lord instead of understanding who Lord is, we will be taking selfie.
And then we are posting on YouTube or Facebook or Instagram. For this purpose we go to pilgrimage.
No, Prabhupada is telling, hearing process as mentioned here and before, this realization is the presence of the Lord in the temple made possible.
By hearing you can realize that Deity form is Krishna himself. So that is the importance of hearing.
So next time whenever you go to any pilgrimage, Vrindavan or any other places, please make sure to hear nicely about Lord.
Then go to temple and see the Deities. You may cover one or two less temples, doesn't matter.
Next time again you come and cover these temples, but do not compromise on hearing.
We also do the same thing most of the times when we go to some trips.
So we make sure that we do our entire morning program, Mangala Aarti, Darshan Aarti, Guru Puja, chanting 16 rounds, hearing Bhagavatam.
After that we leave that place so that we have background understanding what actually I am doing.
Otherwise we will go to temple, we will see one Deity, we will take one selfie, another Deity, another selfie and then again we will come back.
Khatam, temple visit done. So this is not the purpose of temple visit.
So let's again read the remaining portion of that past time.
So we had discussed that the brahmana, he said the elder brahmana, his son is telling that you just said, you tell that you don't remember what you have promised.
Now next what is happening? When he heard his son's statement, who heard the elder brahmana?
When he heard his son's statement, the mind of the elderly brahmana became very agitated.
Feeling helpless, he simply turned his attention to the lotus feet of Gopal and prayed,
My dear Lord Gopal, I have taken shelter of your lotus feet and therefore I request you to please protect my religious principles and disturbance and at the same time save my kinsmen from time.
The next day, while the elderly brahmana was thinking deeply about this matter, the young brahmana came to his house.
After coming before the old man and offering rest of the obeisances, he very humbly folded his hands and spoke as follows.
You have promised to give your daughter to me, but now you do not say anything. What is your conclusion?
The elderly brahmana remained silent.
Taking this opportunity, his son immediately came out of the house with a stick to strike the younger brahmana.
The son said, Oh, you are most degraded. You want to marry my sister just like a dwarf who wants to catch the moon.
Seeing the stick in the hand of the son, younger brahmana fled.
The next day, however, she gathered together all the people of the village.
They called for the elderly brahmana and brought him to their meeting place.
The young brahmana then began to speak before them as follows.
This gentleman has promised to give his daughter to me, yet now he does not keep his promise.
Please ask him about his behavior.
I hope everybody is in sync and know what is happening.
All the people gathered there addressed the elderly brahmanas.
Why are you not fulfilling your promise? You have given your word of honor.
The elderly brahmana said, My dear friends, I do not exactly remember making a promise like that.
So now he also, because of this son's pressure, he told the same thing that I don't remember what to do what I told.
When the old man heard this, it took the opportunity to juggle some words.
Becoming very impudent, he stood before the assembly and said,
While touring various holy places of pilgrimage, my father carried much money.
Seeing the money, this rogue decided to steal it.
There was no one beside this man with my father.
Giving him an intoxicant known as dhutura to eat, this rogue made my father mad.
Then he took all my father's money and claimed that it had been taken by some thief.
Now he is claiming that my father has promised to give my sister in charity.
All of you assembled here, gentlemen, please judge whether it is befitting to offer this poor brahmana my father's daughter.
Hearing this statement, all the people gathered there became little and doubtful.
They thought it was quite possible that because of attraction for the riches, one might give up the religious principles.
At that time, the young brahmana said, My dear gentlemen, please hear.
Just to gain victory in an argument, this man is lying.
Being very satisfied with my service, this brahmana said to me of his own accord, I promised to give my daughter to you.
At that time, I forbade him to do this, telling him, Oh, best of the brahmanas, I am not a fit husband for your daughter.
Whereas you are a learned scholar, a rich man belonging to an aristocratic family.
I am a poor, uneducated man with no claim of aristocracy.
Still, the brahmana insisted again.
He asked me to accept the proposal, saying, I had given you my daughter.
Please accept her. I then said, Please hear me.
You are learned brahmana. Your wife, friends and relatives will never agree to this proposal.
My dear sir, you will not be able to fulfill your promise.
Your promise will be broken.
Yet again, the brahmana emphasized his promise.
I have offered you my daughter.
He said, Do not hesitate.
She is my daughter and I shall give you who can forbid me.
At the time, I concentrated my mind and requested the brahmana to make a promise before the Gopal deity.
When we came before the deity, the gentleman said, My dear lord, please witness that I have offered my daughter to this brahmana in charity.
Accepting the Gopal deity as my witness, I then submitted the following at his lotus feet.
My dear lord, if this brahmana later hesitates to give me his daughter, I shall call you as a witness.
Please note this with care and attention.
Thus, I have called upon a great personality in this transaction.
I have asked the supreme personality of Godhead to be my witness.
The entire world accepts the word of the supreme personality of Godhead.
Although the young brahmana described himself as having no claims to aristocracy and as being an uneducated common man, still he had some good qualification.
He believed the prosanity of Godhead was the topmost authority.
He accepted the words of Lord Krishna without hesitation and he had found faith in the Lord's consistency.
When the young brahmana was finished speaking, the elderly brahmana immediately agreed to this statement.
He said, if Gopal personally comes here to serve as a witness, I shall surely give my daughter to the young brahmana.
The elderly brahmana's son also immediately agreed saying, yes, this is a very nice settlement.
So now, what is the settlement?
The Lord will come from Vrindavan to prove that this young brahmana is telling whatever he is telling is correct.
So, to Krishna's story.
Kahani ma tu stand.
So, this is the temple you can see.
This is right now situated in Kattak.
The same Gopal lady who testified the dispute between two brahmanas was moved to this temple in Kattak, India.
It is in Kattak, Odisha from Vidyanagar to by King Purushottama.
So, let's read next.
As the Supersoul within the heart of all living entities, Krishna knows everyone's desire, everyone's request and everyone's prayer.
The father and son were thinking in a contradictory way.
Yet, Krishna created a situation where they both agreed.
So, Krishna made a situation, then both of them agreed.
The elderly brahmana thought, since Lord Krishna is very merciful, he will certainly come to prove my statement.
The atheistic son thought, it is not possible for Gopal to come and bear witness.
Thinking like this, both father and son agreed.
He said, Lord will never come. How someone can come?
The young brahmana took this opportunity to speak.
Please write this down so that you may not again change your world of honor.
All the people assembled got this statement down in black and white.
And taking the signature of agreement from both of them served as mediators.
The young brahmana said, Will you all gentlemen present, please hear me?
This elderly brahmana is certainly truthful and is following the religious principle.
He has no desire to break his promise, but fearing that the kinsman will come in suicide, he is deviating from the truth.
By the piety of the elderly brahmana, I shall call the Supreme Personality of Godhead as witness.
Thus, I shall keep his promise intact.
The young brahmana immediately started from Vrindavan upon arriving there.
He first offered his respect to the deity and then narrated everything in full detail.
My Lord, he said, You are the protector of the Brahminical culture and you are very very merciful.
You are also very merciful. Therefore kindly show your great mercy by protecting the religious principle of us to brahmanas.
My dear Lord, I am not thinking to become happy by getting the daughter as a bride.
I am simply thinking the old brahmana has broken his promise and that is giving me great pain.
It was not at all intention of the young brahmana to get the daughter of the elderly brahmana in marriage and thus enjoy material happiness and sense gratification.
His only concern was that the only elderly brahmana had promised something and if Gopal did not bear witness to that transaction, then the old brahmana would incur spiritual blemish.
That is why the young brahmana went to Vrindavan to ask the deity for the protection and help.
The young brahmana was pure Vaishnava, devotee of the Lord and his only desire was to serve the supreme personality of Godhead and the older brahmana who was also very devoted to the Lord.
My voice muted. Is it like that? I am not audible? I think I should be.
I am audible. I am audible. Please check from your side.
So now there is a twist. The young brahmana continued.
My dear sir, you are very merciful and you know everything. Therefore kindly be a witness in this case.
A person who knows things as they are and still does not bear witness becomes involved in sinful activities.
So now he is telling that you know everything and if you still do not involve then you will be sinful.
So the brahmana is telling to the Lord that you will be a sinful person if you do not involve here.
So this is a very nice dealing between devotee and Lord.
The dealings between a devotee and the Lord are very simple.
The young brahmana said to the Lord, you know everything but if you do not bear witness you will be involved in sinful activities.
There is no possibility however for the Lord being involved in sinful activities.
A pure devotee even though he knows everything of the Supreme Lord can speak with the Lord exactly as you are a common man.
So he is speaking like a common man.
Lord Krishna replied. So now DT is speaking.
You see Lord Krishna replied.
Now somebody can say it is a mythology, it is you know somebody has written the story, how we can all these things.
So maybe you may think like that but this is mentioned in Chaitanya Sarita Amrita.
Chaitanya Sarita Amrita is a literature where everyone accepts and Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's all the character pastimes are there.
And the temples also still existing where this pastime happened.
So you may call it as a story or maybe mythology but it is a fact is fact.
Lord Krishna replied.
So he is telling you just go back and call everyone and remember me.
I will personally come there and then I will tell whatever you are telling.
My dear sir said the young brahmana even if you appear there as a 400 Vishnu DT still none of the people will believe in your words.
Only if you go there in this form of Gopal and speak the words from your beautiful face will your testimony will be accepted by the people.
So he is telling no no no not like that. You have to personally come. You have to come with me.
Lord Krishna said I have never heard a DT walking from one place to another.
So Krishna is telling I am a DT. I am a DT. How can I walk? How is it possible that a DT can walk? I have never heard something like this.
So now brahmana is telling that is true but how is that that you are speaking to me although you are a DT.
So he is telling when a DT can speak then they can walk also. When you are speaking to me you can walk also.
My dear lord you are not a statue. You are actually Krishna the son of Maharaj Nanda.
Now for the sake of the old brahmana you can do something you have never done before.
So he is telling that when you can speak you can walk also. So please come with me in making that proposal.
So finally Gopal Ji agreed. So Gopal Ji smiled and said my dear brahmana just listen to me.
I shall walk behind you and in this way I shall go with you.
Those who have understood the science of Krishna, Krishna's name, form, quality and so forth can also talk with the DT.
To an ordinary person however the DT will appear to be made of stone, wood or some other material.
In the higher sense since all the material elements ultimately emanate from the supreme spiritual entity nothing is really material.
Being omnipotent, omnipresent and omniscient Krishna can deal with his devotees in any form without difficulty.
By the mercy of the lord the devotee knows perfectly well about the laws of dealing. Indeed he can talk face to face with him.
The lord told, the lord continued, do not try to see me by turning around. So Krishna gave a condition.
Do not try to see me. I will be keep, I will be keep keeping walking. Do not just try to come around see me.
As soon as you see me I shall remain stationary in that place.
If you see me then I will be stationary in that place. I will not walk further.
You will know that I am walking behind you by the sound of my ankle bells.
Cook one kilo of rice daily and offer it to me. I shall eat that rice and follow behind you.
So Krishna's condition is that do not see me and I want rice every day.
The next day Brahmana started for home and Gopal followed him step by step.
While he walked the young Brahmana could not hear the tinkling sound of the lord's ankle bells.
Sorry, could hear the tinkling sound of the lord's ankle bells.
The Brahmana became very pleased and he cooked first class rice for Gopal to eat.
When he neared his own village the young man began to think as follows.
Having come, now this young Brahmana is thinking, what is he thinking?
Having now come to my own village I shall go home and tell all the people the witness has arrived.
Then the Brahmana turned to look back and then he saw the lord Gopal, the supreme god was standing there smiling.
So he just turned around and he saw behind and then Diti was stationary.
The lord told the Brahmana, now you can go home. I shall stay here. Do not fear.
The young Brahmana went to the town and informed everyone of Gopal's arrival.
They were struck with wonder. All the townspeople went to see the witness Gopal
and when they saw him actually standing there, they offered their respect to Lugvi Senses.
They were very pleased to see the beauty of Gopal and when they heard he had actually walked they were all amazed.
Then elderly Brahmana became very pleased, come forward and immediately fall like a stick in front of Gopal.
Thus in the presence of all the townspeople lord Gopal both witnessed that the elderly Brahmana had offered his duty,
his daughter in charity to the young Brahman. After the marriage ceremony was performed,
the lord informed both the Brahmanas, you two Brahmanas are my eternal servant birth after birth.
I have become very pleased by the truthfulness of you both. Now you can ask for any bendiction.
With great pleasure the Brahmana said, please remain here so that people all over the world will know how merciful you are to your servants.
Thus lord Gopal stayed and the two Brahmanas engaged in his service.
After hearing this incident many people from different provinces began to come to see Gopal.
Eventually the king of province in which Vidyanagar is located heard this wonderful story.
He also came to see Gopal. Being very satisfied the king constructed a nice temple and regular service was executed.
Thus the deity became very famous as Sakshi Gopal, as the Gopal who bore witness to the marriage.
Sakshi means witness and Gopal means supreme person recorded. So deity became very famous and by the name Sakshi Gopal.
And this temple is now there in context. We will see the deities, what were the deities of Gopal and the temple also.
So this is the temple.
So this is the temple.
This is the temple. It's in Katak and the deity and this is the deity of Sakshi Gopal.
This is Sakshi Gopal deity. When you go to this temple you will find this deity there.
Very beautiful, very beautiful and in fact the lotus feet is not visible here.
But when you go to temple you can see lotus feet also very nicely from very near you can see.
So this is the temple, this is the deity of Sakshi Gopal.
Lord Up and it is mentioned Chetan Chetan Amrita, Lord walked for 100 days from Rinnavan to this place.
100 days Lord was walking for His devotee. So you can see how merciful Krishna is for His devotee walking for 100 days.
Let's see what Prabhupada says, one very important thing about this deity.
How can deity speak? Prabhupada says.
The devotee express their minds before the deity and in many instances the deity also gives answer.
But one must be very elevated devotee in order to be able to speak with the Supreme Lord.
Sometimes the Lord informs the devotee through dreams.
These exchanges of feeling between the deity and the devotee are not understandable by atheists but actually the devotee enjoys them.
Atheists will never understand all these things. For him it will be a story.
Just by clapping the hands one may cause many birds to fly away.
Similarly the birds of all sinful activities which are sitting on the body of man can be made to fly simply by dancing and climbing before the deity of Krishna.
It is in Padma Purana.
So when a person is very very restless it is mentioned for him to involve himself in deity worship.
Especially for householder Prabhupada says, those who are married householder for them it is very very important to engage in deity worship.
Prabhupada also encouraged that all of those who are householders they should have deity at their home for purification and every day they should perform deity worship.
So that way they should engage their mind and consciousness in worshipping their deity.
In Aradi Purana there is a statement about the bowing down and offering respect to the deity.
It is said there a person who has performed a great ritualistic sacrifice and a person who has simply offered respect to revisions by bowing down before the Lord cannot be held as equals.
The person who has executed many great sacrifices will attain the result of his pious activities.
But when such rituals are finished he has to take birth again on the earthy planet.
Whereas the person who has once offered respect bowing down before the deity will not again come back to this world because he will directly go back to Krishna.
So this is about the deity worship and in Gaudiya Vaishnava especially you see all the many temples.
Radha Govind Dev Ji, Radha Gopinath Ji, Radha Madana Mohana Ji these are the three principal deities which Gaudiya Vaishnava they worship.
And there are many other temples also.
And Chaitanya Mahapuru gave a very important place to deity worship.
He talked about five things which are very very important.
One of them is deity worship.
Deity worship is very very important.
And for a person who cannot appreciate chanting, who cannot appreciate any other activities, he simply goes to temple, sees the deities, his mind will be cleansed.
So such an importance of deity worship.
And through this pastime we saw, that's like in this pastime Lord has come out of altar.
He has walked from such a far place from Vrindavan to South India.
Similarly there is one more pastime where Lord has actually stolen sweet rice for his devotee.
It's called a Sheer Chor Gopinath.
Just like this deity is called as Sakshi Gopal because the Lord Gopal was the witness Sakshi.
Similarly there is one more temple called as Sheer Chor Gopinath.
You will find again it is when you go to Odisha again.
So this temple is again there where Lord for his devotee, the devotee's name was Madhavendra Puri.
For Madhavendra Puri Lord has stolen sweet rice.
Now Lord can steal also.
You can see when Lord is walking, Lord is stealing there.
For his devotee he has stolen sweet rice.
Like that many many pastimes are there.
There is one more devotee Baldev Vidya Bhushan.
Baldev Vidya Bhushan is one of the Acharya in our Sampradaya if you see.
So for Baldev Vidya Bhushan Lord personally has spoken Govinda Bhashna.
That means the commentary on Vedanta Sutra.
There is a very nice pastime in this discussion.
So there are many many pastimes where you will see the Lord can reciprocate.
But Prabhupada is telling one has to be very advanced and elevated devotee in order to speak to the Lord.
But it is possible you can speak to the Lord.
So now we have to understand that we should whenever we go to temple we should fulfill all reverence.
We should pay our obeisances and simply appreciate the beauty of the Lord.
And Prabhupada also said it is also a fact till the time a person is advanced in spiritual life he cannot stand in front of Deity for a long time.
Just like whenever you see people go to temple.
They go to temple and just or they will come in front of Deities and just two seconds, three seconds they will do like this and after that they will do like this.
They will see here and there.
Again they are not seen in front of the Lord.
Lord is in front of him.
He is not seen there.
He is watching everything.
Taking selfie.
So till the time a person is actually advanced he cannot stand in front of Deity for a long time.
That is also a fact.
And Prabhupada especially when he used to go to these places like very old temples, Surya Nidavan.
Prabhupada used to be very very grave.
The one said Prabhupada went to Simhachalam.
Simhachalam is a place in South India where Narasimha temples are there.
Prabhupada went there and disciples were telling Prabhupada was so grave.
He was not speaking at all.
So then he said that the importance of these places can be appreciated by a person who is spiritually advanced.
Otherwise you may go to Vrindavan also but you will simply do sightseeing and you will come back.
Till the time a person is spiritually advanced you cannot appreciate these places also.
Especially Deities also.
