As we saw in the last class, human life is meant for sacrifice.
And this was known to the people at large.
They were knowing, as we discussed yesterday, the example of the great industrialist of our country,
Srinanda Nilikani, he said, you have right to perform the action,
but you do not have right upon the results which you produce or the money which you produce.
You have right to do karma, but you do not have right upon the fruits that you produce from your activities.
So now some people may think, so fruit does not belong to me, then what is the use of working so hard?
Why we work so hard? Because the fruit enchants us.
Oh, if I get this fruit, it is very nice. If I get money, it will be nice.
If I get name, fame, it is nice. I get power, resources. It is very nice.
But now Krishna has told here, it does not belong to you.
So why would you work so hard then? Then a person may choose laziness.
So that is why Krishna immediately tells in the next line,
So Krishna is telling two very important things in the second chapter of the Bhagavad Gita.
So Krishna tells, first of all, do not become the cause of your activities.
Now Krishna has given us freedom. You can create fresh activities, basis your desire,
or I have some plan of this material world for you.
So activity has been decided as per me and you simply follow my instructions.
So then you will not become the cause of the activity.
So the example given is just like an army man.
An army personnel can kill many, many people under the direction of the government.
When it does so, then he is given gallantry award.
But the same person, if he kills just one person on his own whims, whimsically, then he'll be punished.
There would be court martial.
So I request all of you do not put questions in between because what happens,
you will not be able to hear what I'm speaking.
Yes, many questions will be there. There is proper forum.
I'll be more than happy to answer all the questions.
But now if you put questions, you will miss what we are discussing here.
So that is why please type questions at 840 when the class is over.
Don't do before it. So I will take all the questions which are posted 840 onwards.
And the questions preferably should be related to class.
When all those questions are over, then we can take up other questions.
Also, you are free to post it.
But now please try to hear because many questions will be answered in course of the class.
And which are not answered, I'll be happy to answer after the class.
Now, please try to hear attentively because the spiritual realization happens by attentive hearing.
With great attention, we have to hear that's it.
Even if we are not able to understand, we do not get the meaning.
It does not matter. We should be simply very, very attentive.
So Krishna tells this very, very important understanding, just like a soldier.
If he kills on his own whims, then he is the cause of that killing.
But if he works under the direction of government, he is not the cause of those killings.
Government had decided to kill those people, the enemies or whatever perpetrators of violence.
So he's simply acting as an instrument. That's it.
So in a similar fashion, Krishna told to Arjuna, I have some plan here.
Understand my plan for this material world and then do not desire anything whimsically.
And the second thing is now you may think now, Krishna, I cannot work also independently.
I have to follow your orders and following your orders, the fruit which comes out of it, I do not have right upon that fruit.
Then what is the use of such hard work?
So Krishna tells, Mathe Sanghvastva Karmany, do not become attached to a Karmany, not doing your duty also.
So this thing is difficult to understand. What is the motivation?
Just like several people tell, I saw you speaking to one of the devotees.
I think he's also hearing the class. So I told him, now it's locked down here.
Everyone is locked. So now you're saving so much time.
So why don't you chant some extra rounds? So all the sincere devotees, they are.
The minimum recommendation is to chant 16 rounds of Hare Krishna Mahamantra every day.
So if you're chanting 16 rounds, now you have time.
Chant 32 rounds or even more. Purify your consciousness.
So you told, if I do 32 rounds, I will not feel like doing my work anymore.
So many people, they get scared of Krishna consciousness.
They think that if I chant more, if I follow very nicely, then I will lose all interest in my duties, in my work, in my studies, whatever.
I won't be able to work at all. So there was one devotee.
So he was chanting for a long time 15 rounds.
So we asked the devotees ask why you're chanting 15.
We have to chant 16. If you chant 16 rounds and follow four principles throughout your life,
no power in this world can stop you from going back to God.
So you are chanting 15 rounds. Why don't you chant 16? One more round.
So you told me, Prabhu, this I have strong faith that 16 rounds have got tremendous potential.
Or if I chant 16 rounds, I don't want that.
I want to do my duties, my job very, very nicely.
So that is why I will not chant 16 rounds. I'm happy with 15 rounds only.
So some people are scared like that. They don't feel any motivation to work.
So what is the motivation? So that is what Krishna answers here today.
So I will share the screen and all of you please try to read the shloka.
This session is dedicated to His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
Swami Prabhupada is our spiritual master and the founder Acharya of worldwide Hare Krishna movement.
So let us see verse number 24 today.
Now Krishna is telling. Krishna explained in the previous class how yajna everyone is supposed to do
and various kinds of yajna are recommended.
If a person cannot do yajna in bhakti yoga, he can do jnana yajna.
He can do dravya yajna and other sacrifices, but sacrifice is important.
Here, Krishna is revealing now the confidential thing to whom this thing is ultimately going.
Who is getting this money ultimately?
Just like when monarchy was there in the country, one king was ruling entire country.
So all the people who are doing some farming, having small lands,
they have to give some tax to the local landholder.
Now he does not keep the money with himself, a small portion of it, of course, but then it goes to the king.
Ultimately, all the money which people are giving to the landholders, it is going to the king.
And the king also in turn is not keeping the money.
The king is sending to the emperor.
So in this way, it is very, very important to know where the money is ultimately going.
He is the most powerful person where all this money, whatever I am offering either to the landlord or to the king or to whatever,
ultimately it is going to the emperor.
So that is how when anybody would come, first they will present a treaty that you please give us tax to the other kings.
And you can rule your kingdom, but you have to give tax to us.
It means you have accepted our subordination. We are the emperors.
So in similar fashion, Krishna is telling here,
of whatever yajna you do, whether you are following Brahmacharya,
which is the yajna of you control the activities of the senses, you regulate your sense enjoyment,
or you enter into household life, you regulate again your unrestricted enjoyment,
or you go for Vanaprastha, you again sacrifice the pleasures of family,
or you take sannyas, that is, you sacrifice everything in the service of supreme,
the results of all the activities.
So whatever yajna you are doing, Krishna is telling,
So now this is a very important point.
Krishna is telling,
So Krishna is telling,
a person who does not come to understand this ultimate point,
he falls down, he has to return back to this material world,
just like if a person has to go to catch a flight,
and then he has to cross various milestones he leaves from his home.
Now he has reached this place, this milestone, this building, this colony, this society,
and then ultimately he is nearing the airport,
then he has entered into the boarding area, waiting lounge,
but then he does not board the flight, then what will happen?
Again he has to come back home, he could not sit in the flight.
So unless that person sits on the flight seat, all that endeavour is waste.
Krishna is telling,
A person who is doing all the rituals very, very nicely,
who is doing this also, that also, other duties also,
like the brahmacharis, they have to face the question,
Oh, why you are not doing your duty?
You are leaving your duties, doing all these things.
So actually, yes, the duties are very, very important,
but we have to understand what is the ultimate purpose of all these duties.
It is just like, you know, studying is the duty of a student.
He should study very, very nicely.
And then he studied very nicely, gave the exam, he cleared the exam.
Now there is time for an interview.
And they are calling, please come and give the interview.
And he is telling, No, I will not leave my duty.
I have to study 16 hours every day.
I study 16 hours, I will not appear for an interview.
Then his entire study is waste.
The purpose of entire study is ultimately to clear the interview and get a job.
So if that person is calling you, you leave your studies and immediately go for the interview.
So if a person does not understand this, what happens?
He has to keep on studying.
Repeat again.
Repeat the same syllabus.
Keep on doing it over and over again.
In a similar fashion, Krishna tells a person who does not understand,
who does not understand the truth about Krishna,
that ultimately all the duties are meant for my satisfaction.
So various duties are given.
Duties are different for different people.
According to the Vana and Ashrama, Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra,
you see what is your capacity.
Whether you have orientation of a Brahmana, which means philosopher,
a person who cannot do anything but try to dedicate his life,
he dedicates his life to understand what is truth, what is truth.
I am not the body, I am spirit soul.
From where I have come here, he will only do inquiry.
Brahman cannot spend time in enjoying the bodily senses.
So this is the topmost.
You behave like Brahmana.
You have many, many duties to perform.
That much intelligence is not developed.
Then Kshatriya, you become administrator, second class.
Administrators would be guided by the Brahmanas.
That much intelligence is not there.
Okay, become a trader or a farmer.
That is Vaishya.
Do economic development.
That is also not there.
Pick up a job.
Remain faithful.
Become a Shudra.
So like this, you can pick up various duties.
And similarly, this is for material life and spiritual life also.
So what is spiritual division?
Brahmacharya, grasta, vanaprastha and sannyas.
These are the four things.
But what is the purpose of all these duties?
So that is mentioned very, very nicely in the Vedas,
especially in the Bhagavatam and everywhere, other Puranas.
So it was an assembly of the Brahmanas, very exalted Brahmanas.
The society has been divided into varnas and ashramas for what purpose?
So that a person can do his duty nicely.
And what is the Sam Siddhi, perfection of duty?
Siddhi means perfection.
Sam Siddhi means topmost perfection.
That is Hari Toshanam.
Toshan means pleasure.
Hari means Krishna.
Krishna's pleasure.
That is why Lord Shiva is called Ashutosh.
Tosh means pleasure.
Ashu means soon.
Very soon he gets pleased.
Hari Toshanam, pleasure of Hari.
So all the duties that a person does, it is only meant to please Hari.
If he cannot do it directly, he is supposed to do it indirectly.
But ultimately Hari has to be pleased.
Varnasramacharavata.
What is that shloka?
I am not able to recollect.
Vishnur aradhyate pantha nanyat tattosha karanam.
So it is told, Vishnur aradhyate pantha na anyat tattosha karanam.
The purpose of all the varnasrama activities is Purushena parah puman.
Parah puman means the supreme person.
Vishnur aradhyate.
Param Purush, who is that Param Purush?
The name is called Vishnu.
Na anyat tattosha karanam.
There is no other purpose of all this varnasrama system.
The purpose is to please Parah Puman.
Vishnur aradhyate.
Aradhana of Vishnu.
So this people do not know.
So that is why if a person can directly take up to Aradhana of Vishnu,
then he is free from all the duties.
Otherwise a person has to do duties very very nicely.
This is another thing which people do not know.
Krishna is telling, never work keeping the results of your activities in mind.
Now everyone works keeping the results of his activities in mind.
If I do this thing, then what will I get?
Oh, if I get happiness, I will do this.
If I get physical and mental distress, I will not do that thing.
However, this is not how the human society is designed to act.
Human society is designed to act as per the duties.
Because the results, happiness, distress of this life is fixed.
We cannot change it as per the duties which we performed in previous life.
Just like entire month you work and then salary comes.
Entire year you work and then appraisal comes.
You will be promoted to whatever level.
Or you will be told, please leave the company.
It is as per the previous year's performance.
In a similar fashion, as per the past activities,
a person's happiness and distress is fixed.
So now a person is supposed to follow his duty very very nicely
without caring for material happiness and distress which come to us,
which is not coming because of the actions which we are doing now,
but because of previous actions.
The righteous and impious activities that we did previously.
So that is why a person, when Arjuna was in distress,
he only asked Krishna,
He asked Krishna, Krishna, I am bewildered about dharma.
What is my duty?
So please tell me, he did not ask Krishna,
please tell me what can bring me maximum happiness.
Just like when the students enter the,
because I did B.Tech, so I have experience of engineering college.
So the first year student is more anxious about placements
than the final year student.
As soon as he takes admission,
he is asking, this company, how much package it gives?
That company, how much package it gives?
This is good or that is good?
What is the profile?
Everything, as soon as he takes admission, he is very much anxious.
What is there? What is there?
So he is very much anxious about the result.
Then I should prepare nicely.
What is the result?
What will I get by doing this activity?
But this is never the consideration of the Vedic culture.
Vedic culture means do your duty nicely.
So Arjuna did not ask, what is my pleasure?
Krishna, please tell me.
Because if you follow duty,
even though immediately there could be some discomfort,
ultimately there would be pleasure if you follow your duties very nicely.
Thus a very nice example is there.
Those of you who have attended our basic sessions,
you must be knowing.
In the beginning of the Bhagavad Gita,
Duryodhan, he goes to Dronacharya and he warns him.
So they were not expecting Pandavas who were in exile.
They would be able to arrange such an enormous army,
even though it was less than that of the Kauravas,
but they also had arranged an enormous, a very huge army.
So he told, just see,
Tava shishya na dheemata.
So Dronacharya, you have taught your disciple,
Dhristadyumna, and he has arranged this wonderful army,
which is now ready to defeat us.
So now please do not do any leniency.
So Dronacharya had some conflict with Drupad Maharaj.
And thus Drupad Maharaj, he did some yajna.
And as a boon, he got a son who would be the cause of death of Dronacharya.
And Dronacharya was knowing this,
that this person is going to be the cause of my death,
the son which he has got.
Despite that, he sent his son to Dronacharya only to study,
to understand the science of fighting, martial arts, dhanur vidya.
So now suppose, you know, this person will be the cause of my death.
And he comes and tells, sir, can you please teach me how to kill the enemy,
how to shoot arrows?
Shall we teach that person?
First of all, we'll kill that person, isn't it?
I will teach you.
But Dronacharya, as soon as this person approached him,
he very nicely welcomed him because Dronacharya understood that death is inevitable.
If Dronacharya doesn't teach him, can he stop his death?
No, that has to happen.
That is why Chanakya Pandit.
Prabhupada would often quote Chanakya Pandit.
Although he's not a spiritualist, he's a Brahmana.
Brahmana is also on material platform, but on sattvic platform.
So at least they are very, very clear about the material laws which work here.
So Chanakya Pandit's teachings are very nicely for dealing with the worldly affairs.
So Chanakya tells a very nice shloka.
He tells,
San nimitte varam tyago, Vinashe niyate sati.
San nimitte varam tyago.
And Steve Jobs said the same thing because he took a lot of risks in business.
So people would ask him how you're taking so many risks.
Are you not afraid of losing anything?
So he told, one day I'm going to lose everything.
We have actually lost everything.
We have to die.
So actually we have lost everything.
If I lose now or later, what is the difference?
But he could not connect to spiritual life because not in touch with a bona fide master.
But this understanding is very important.
Chanakya Pandit says,
San nimitte varam tyago, Vinashe niyate sati.
Vinash, the death is fixed.
Is it possible to carry single penny to next life?
Is it possible to carry the name, fame or our relatives to next life?
We have to leave everyone behind.
We have to leave the name, fame, relatives, clothes, our cars, houses, our education, knowledge, all the money, luxuries behind.
So that is why if a person loses it for sat nimitte, for the right cause, then his life is glorious, glorified.
Death has to happen.
If a soldier dies a natural death, then who cares for it?
But if a soldier dies fighting for the country, oh, there is gallantry award.
His statue is put in the area and then the family members, they are taken such good care of and everything is so glorious.
He is glorious. His family lives a glorious life.
But if death happens without any sacrifice for a good cause, then who cares for it?
So that is why Chanakya Pandit says,
Sacrifice everything for a good cause.
It is very nice, wonderful to sacrifice everything for a good cause because anyway, death is going to take everything away from you.
This is called sannyas, Vedic culture.
Sannyas, he realizes this fact and he just like a person who is a goon.
He comes and takes away money from you.
I will kill you.
So you tell him, no, wait, take happily.
I was waiting just for you.
Take all this money.
So happily you will give because you understand anyway.
So happily you give.
So devotee is intelligent.
He tells Krishna, take happily.
I'm your servant only earning for you.
Take everything.
I'll work for you.
So this is intelligence.
This is not any act of great sacrifice or something.
It is intelligence.
Devotee can see very nicely.
So thus, this was the Vedic culture.
Dronacharya understood.
I have to anyway die.
So thus, this was the Vedic culture.
Dronacharya understood.
I have to anyway die.
So now if I do not do my duty nicely, I'll become inglorious that a Brahmana became a miser.
A person came for his teaching and he became scared.
He became afraid.
Brahmana is never supposed to be afraid.
And if I do my duty nicely, I will have promotion in next life.
Just like a kshatriya.
If somebody challenges a kshatriya for fight or gambling or anything, gambling is otherwise sinful.
But if a kshatriya is challenged for gamble, he cannot deny.
That is why Yudhishthir, he went for gamble.
He is Dharmaraj.
He cannot commit mistakes.
So people tell why he went for gambling.
Because kshatriya is taught fearlessness.
You should not fear to lose your life even.
So what to speak of fear of losing money or anything else.
So that is why if there is gambling, there could be fear of losing money.
Don't be afraid.
Accept the challenge.
Kshatriya is supposed to accept every challenge.
If somebody has challenged you to fight and you know death is certain, he is more powerful than me.
Still, you cannot deny the challenge.
You have to accept the challenge.
And if a kshatriya fights and dies fighting, immediately he goes to the same place that Brahmanas go after doing sacrifice and yajnas.
He is promoted to heavenly planets.
How much he goes to a planet where living standard is very, very high.
So this people were knowing very nicely in Vedic culture.
However, people today do not know.
They are simply worried about the result, result, result, which is anyway fixed as per the previous activities.
And thus they don't do their duties properly.
They try to sometimes trespass the regulations of their duty.
Thus, they are always anxious in this life and create misery for future lives.
However, the purpose of all these duties is what?
The ultimate purpose of all duty is to purify the heart.
When we do our duty nicely, we gradually come to Satpugana.
So just like there is an instance.
So when Brahman was there, he was very nice astrologer also.
So he chanced upon Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Lord Chaitanya, who is incarnation of Krishna.
So when he met Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu asked him,
Oh, please tell me what you are very expert astrologer.
Please tell me what I was in my previous life.
So then he did some calculation and then he went into meditation.
And then immediately he was surprised.
Oh, what is this combination?
Because he was seeing Krishna's horoscope, Lord Chaitanya is Krishna only.
So then he told you are a supreme personality of Godhead.
You are controller of everything.
And then Chaitanya Mahaprabhu told you do not know anything.
I will tell you, I was a cowherd boy in previous life.
Krishna was actually a cowherd boy.
I was a cowherd boy in previous life.
And because I did my duties very nicely as a Vaishya of tending the cows, taking good care of them.
In this life, I have been promoted to a Brahminical body.
So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu took birth in a Brahmin family, which is higher than a Vaishya family.
So if a Vaishya does his duty very nicely,
he will be promoted to Kshatriya or a Brahmana.
Then if Brahman continues his research of what is truth, what is truth, what is the origin of the universe,
after many, many births, he can become a Vaishnava.
He can become a devotee.
So in this way, our heart is gradually purified.
If a person does his duties very, very nicely for 100 lifetimes,
it is told then a person can become Brahma.
Brahma is the topmost authority.
Brahma's life is almost spiritual.
Brahma does not have a gross body made up of earth, air, water, fire and sky.
His body is made up of mind, intelligence and false ego.
Just these subtle elements.
So a person can become Brahma also if he does his duties nicely for 100 lifetimes.
So he reaches to the highest level of sattva guna.
So in this way, when we do our duties very nicely,
so the duties are very nicely designed to clear the lust and greed from our heart,
rajas and tamas from our heart and raise us to sattva guna.
And on sattva guna, when we arise, then how to advance further, the path is very, very clear.
And then we can understand spiritual life, God, Bhagavad Gita, Krishna very, very nicely.
However, still if a person does not advance from there,
because in sattva guna, a person will be very happy and peaceful.
And then you may think, what is the need of further cultivating this life?
I am happy, no, I am peaceful.
So that is why we saw in the shloka, Krishna tells,
A person who does not understand me, he falls down.
Even though he has reached very high position, Brahma,
if he does not become a devotee, Brahma also will fall down.
Brahmana also will fall down.
You are now definitely enjoying a very peaceful and happy life,
but you have to degrade yourself.
What to speak of this, Bhagavatam tells,
if a person even reaches Brahma Jyoti in the spiritual world
and merges in the light which is coming out of the body of Krishna,
He also falls down back to this material world.
So unless a person understands Krishna in truth,
not theoretically, a person has to realize.
Realize means a person has to be completely convinced
that I am coming from Krishna, Krishna is my father, he is eternal,
because I am coming from him, I am also eternal,
this body is temporary, I am simply changing bodies.
So my father is living in the spiritual world,
God also has got a place to live.
Why will he float like a ghost in the air?
We live in a place, we want a house to live,
because this tendency is coming from God.
God also wants to live in a place, and God is my father.
So simply my purpose of life is to go back to God.
So if a person understands this firmly,
the purpose of this life is to go back and live in a spiritual body,
not to take these material bodies over and over again,
suffer from many many deaths over and over again.
So this is called realizing Krishna in truth.
Krishna is my origin, I am his part and parcel.
So if this realization is not there, then a person,
whatever happiness he is enjoying, whichever planet he is in, he will come down.
So this is what Krishna shares further in the shloka.
Krishna tells,
Now some people tell that you can worship any god as we were discussing yesterday.
You can imagine any form and then ultimately you will get the same result in spiritual life.
However, here it is clearly mentioned,
those who worship demigods will take birth among the demigods.
Those who worship ghosts and spirits,
will take birth among such beings.
And those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors,
and those who worship me will live with me.
So here very clearly Krishna is telling,
how different worships lead to different destinations.
So there is one, and let us see next shloka also.
So Krishna has told that ultimately you have to sacrifice all your energy,
whatever results of your activities you are having for me for my pleasure.
And then what things do I accept?
What you can offer me, that Krishna explains here.
Patra means leaf, ideally Tulsi leaves.
If Tulsi is not available, any other leaf you can offer.
Pushpam, you offer some flowers to Krishna.
Falam, some fruits to Krishna.
Toyam, Toyam means fluid.
Some water, milk or some liquids, some juices.
Even devotion, leaf, flower, fruit or water, I will accept it.
Ashnami, especially the word means I eat.
I eat that thing when anybody offers it to me.
So there is one very old organization in our country,
which tells, so I was traveling with a boy a couple of weeks ago.
And then he told you people are very strict.
So he got educated in the school of such mission.
And then he told, there I have seen sadhus,
for many many years I did schooling there in that place.
And they all eat meat and they drink wine also.
They order food also from hotels and restaurants and everything.
So they say that eating and drinking has nothing to do with spiritual life.
Eating and drinking is for the body and spiritual life is different.
Spirituality is for soul.
So you follow this thing but eat whatever you want, drink whatever you want.
And these people tell, as many ways, as many paths, so many ways.
So if you think I want to worship this form, you can worship that form as God, as form of God.
I want to worship this form, you can do that.
So the founder of this sect, he has told Advaita philosophy is correct.
Advaita philosophy is also correct.
How can both be correct?
Both philosophies are contradictory.
So one philosophy is totally against another philosophy.
So you are telling this is also correct and that is also correct.
You are telling this person is living also, this person is dead also.
Both are correct.
He is living.
How is it possible?
Either a person can be living or he can be dead.
So unfortunately, people do not take spiritual life as a science.
So spirituality is simply science.
That is why Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita,
I am going to speak to you Gyan and Vijnan.
I am going to speak to you knowledge, theoretical and scientific knowledge, realized knowledge.
What is science?
Understanding the actual nature of think.
Oh, this is not ordinary cough.
This is not ordinary fever.
It is coronavirus.
Go to the root.
If you go to the root from where the symptoms are coming, you can actually solve that problem.
In a similar fashion, you understand what is the root of this entire world?
What is the origin?
This discovery is called spiritual life and nothing else.
This discovery of truth, understanding what is truth, that is spiritual life.
And without understanding truth, where is the possibility of happiness?
If you don't understand what is causing this disease, you will never be happy.
In a similar fashion, unless you understand the actual nature of this world, you will never be happy.
This is spiritual life.
So this magic shagic and all these things, only foolish people get attracted by that.
So just like one devotee was telling.
So among the families which come for our weekly classes, there is a family and their daughter has learned a wonderful art.
She can read books with her eyes completely blindfolded and our devotees practically witnessed that.
So I took a very new book of Prabhupada to her and she had not seen that book.
But when he showed her the book, she was able to tell the color of the front page, the cover.
She was able to tell what is drawn on the front page.
And then she was opening the books and reading it very, very clearly as if we read with open eyes.
And then I thought maybe there is something with your this fold, which you are wearing on your eye.
Then the devotee and it was very special for eyes are completely blocked.
You cannot see anything in that.
So this is a special technique.
They tell only children can develop if they are trained nicely.
Once a person is grown, he cannot do it.
So now suppose a sadhu sitting on the stage.
He's having very nice beard or he's having shaven head and having white or saffron or black or whatever clothes.
And if he reads like this, he's reading Ramayan and Bhagavad Gita, Mahabharata with eyes closed, blindfolded.
People will surrender. Oh, Bhagawan, Bhagawan, he's reading like that.
So Prabhupada tells, what is the use?
Ultimately, with eyes closed or eyes open, you have to study.
You have to take the trouble. You will suffer.
You want to suffer with eyes closed or eyes open.
This siddhi makes only that much difference.
So Prabhupada told magic is meant for foolish people who do not know how things are acting in this world.
Spiritual life is not magic. Magic is meant for foolish people.
Spiritual life is science.
Spiritual life is meant for understanding what is the origin of this world.
And that is explained in the scriptures very, very nicely.
What is true? Who you are?
You are this body or you are the soul within this body from where you have come.
Understand the truth.
This is spiritual life and nothing else.
So some people who do not understand the spiritual life, just like some people who do not know science, carbon and oxygen is water.
Or nitrogen and oxygen is water.
Somebody is telling hydrogen and oxygen is water.
He is telling everything is correct.
Nitrogen when you mix, that is also water.
Carbon when you mix, that is also water.
Hydrogen you mix with oxygen, that is also water.
As many theories, so many ways of making water.
This is foolishness.
So this is one philosophy and that is a very famous mission, unfortunately.
But if any person reads this shloka of Bhagavad Gita, he will tell.
They recommend whatever God you want to worship, you can worship.
If you worship one particular demigod, you will go to that demigod.
You worship another demigod, you will go to that demigod.
Some people worship ghosts.
So one of our devotees in Jaipur, I don't know if he's also hearing today the lecture.
So he had practical experience.
His entire family got haunted because in villages when people are, they are very tamasic.
So they do this ghostly worship and their main aim is tamasic people.
They are envious of others.
They want to destroy other people.
So they wanted to because they were flourishing very nicely.
Father was doing nice business.
Brothers were into nice things.
So then they became envious.
They wanted to spoil everything.
And thus they did some small things and the family started suffering from these ghostly activities.
And then they told, actually, we have seen that you are suffering, all of you.
And he had just taken admission in college of engineering first year.
And he told, please call your son also other son.
They are three brothers.
So two of them were there in the village only.
And all of you sit here.
We have arranged a yagya.
And once this yagya is done, all your problems will be solved.
Actually, it was a plot to even get them haunted even more deeply.
So then because he was there in another city, taken admission in college, he became little late in reaching for the yagya.
And when he reached, yagya was over.
And then he saw his family members in weird expressions.
And, you know, like we see in many places and and they were speaking.
I think he told me in different voices also.
And they were not able to identify him, his mother, his father and all of them was it was very horrible situation.
And then always they would fight in the house.
And this thing will happen.
They cannot go in front where they had kept pictures in their house.
They would fall down.
They'll fall unconscious as soon as they enter that place.
They went to various temples, did various poojas and all of things.
So much money they lost in this.
Lakhs of rupees they spent, but they were not able to come out.
So Prabhupada had experience of ghost hunting when they went to London also to start temple.
Even Prabhupada took a place in Calcutta at throwaway price because it was haunted place and dishes and everything would fly in that house.
So the servants were scared.
They told Prabhupada when he was there, how you are living in this place and the ghosts are moving around in this place.
So Prabhupada told I am ghost proof.
Nothing can happen to me.
And then devotees chased many, many.
They took many haunted places and chased away the ghosts.
So then I told him that please call your family to temples and I think everything will be solved.
So then first of all, I think the brother had come or mother.
I think brother came first and brother just stayed one night in the temple and his problem got solved.
Immediately mother became completely well.
Brother became completely well.
Brother was so much captured.
He was having some shop.
Some customer is coming.
He cannot give it to the customer.
He cannot do anything.
He was so much feeling controlled.
So then he became well in overnight stay.
Then mother came.
Mother came along with father.
They stayed for one day in the temple.
Attended our morning Sankirtan program and everything.
And they also became well chanted 16 rounds Hare Krishna Mantra very nicely.
Overnight they became well and everyone became well.
All five, six family members and the village is surprised.
You tried so many things just for one night.
You people went and everything is solved.
What is this?
And then the devotees went to his place, did night Sankirtan.
And those of you who know Madhav Charan from Jaipur, you can ask him the details.
So they went there, did night Sankirtan.
And the person who was doing magic, they went to her place also.
There also they did night Sankirtan.
She was trying to scare everyone away by banging her hairs in the air and all that.
But they did night Sankirtan and they came back.
After that no haunting, nothing happened.
And the whole village is surprised.
So then this boy told me.
Then his mother, whenever she would go to any place, she would always carry chanting beads with her.
And she would recommend Abhi chankaro Hare Krishna immediately.
So like this, we have seen many, many places anyway.
So some people, they worship the ghosts.
So those who worship ghosts, they will go to the ghost.
They'll become ghosts in next life.
Those people who worship Devatas will go to Devatas and those who worship Krishna will only go to Krishna.
And the place where Krishna lives is completely spiritual.
That is suitable for our living.
When a person goes there, then it does not come back to this material world.
So that is why the aim of this life is
Whether it be a person who is sitting in meditation.
He has to think of Krishna.
In Kalyuga, we do it by chanting and hearing always.
The success of this life is to get absorbed in the thoughts of Krishna.
Understanding all the duties are meant so that a person can understand Krishna.
And then
You do some seva to Krishna.
Offer something in love.
Just like a father can eat whatever he likes.
Still, he expects childs can cut a piece of cake and offer to father.
Why? Because he's expecting love from the child, not the cake.
He can eat so much unlimited, but he want the love of the child.
So that is why Krishna is not hungry for a leaf or water or this thing.
Krishna understands unless we develop strong love for Krishna, a person will not be satisfied.
As we discussed yesterday, the richest person of the world sacrifice 50% of his wealth to get that love.
Another great celebrity, technologist, businessman.
He's suffering because he has no love in his life.
So thus, if a person is supposed to sacrifice, he's sacrificing 50% of his income, billions of dollars.
So it means wealth will not satisfy us.
That person has maximum wealth in the world, but he's not satisfied.
What we want in life is love.
Krishna knows that we can get that loving relationship, that happiness, that bliss only in relationship with Krishna.
So that is why Krishna tells you, please offer something to me.
Patram push from phalam toyam.
And then you take that in this way, you will develop love for me.
And then Krishna declare something further that we will see in the next class.
So now I request we will all chant little for five minutes and then we will take up questions.
So this chanting is most important part every day as much as possible beef we should do.
But few rounds on beads we should not miss doing.
So I request all of you to please sit with spine, select and the session is over for now.
Those who wish to carry on can carry on.
But I request that you can please do some chanting and then you can leave.
And those who wish to stay back for questions, I'll be online till nine fifteen to answer the questions.
So please chant the Panchatattva Mantra after me.
And after that Hare Krishna Maha Mantra we will chant together.
We'll chant together, hear attentively each and every word.
Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare Hare
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare
Hail Shree Krishna Chaitanya
Chaitanya
Prabhu Nithyananda
Sri Advaita Gadadhara
Sri основа
gensива,
mica Frisena
So please do this chanting every day, now we will take up some questions!
Hare Krishna, Prabhu, I am chanting with motive that I
if I continuously associate with the holy name
Then I will be free from the modes of material nature. After continuous practice of this one day, I will get Krishna Prema. Is this right motive?
Or we just chant with the motive of I am chanting for the pleasure of Krishna, which is the right attitude, Prabhu. Please guide, Prabhuji.
It is okay. Both are okay. We have to be very eager for Krishna Prema. When will I get love of God? Great Acharyas have sung songs.
Bhakti Vinod Thakur has sung. Various Acharyas have sung.
When that day will become, when I chant the names of Krishna, tears will come out of my eyes. I will develop strong love for Krishna.
So that is a genuine aspiration. And also I am chanting for the pleasure of Krishna. This also attitude is very nice. Both are okay.
Hare Krishna, Prabhuji. What is Sankh Yoga? I explained that day also. Sankh Yoga is a combination of knowledge and meditation.
You can read in six chapter of Bhagavad Gita and also you can read in third canto of Shrimad Bhagavatam.
Dear Prabhuji, how vegan is different from non vegan as vegan food firm destroys the habitat of species.
Vegan food firm destroys the habitat of species. Vegan is different from there are various kinds of foods.
Some people are vegetarian, some people are non vegetarian, some people are vegans and their keto diet and so many diets are there.
So all these diets more or less are mental concoctions and non vegetarian is more sinful and a vegan or vegetarian is less sinful.
But all are sinful. So we are not concerned with vegan or vegetarian or non vegetarian.
We are Krishnitarians, Srila Prabhupada explains.
The purpose of life is to purify your existence and that can happen only by honoring Krishna Prasadam.
Today we saw the shloka Krishna is telling,
Patram pushpam phalam toyam. You offer these things unto me and I eat.
And tomorrow we will see Krishna is telling, whatever you eat, it should be offered to me.
Srila Prabhupada has offered food. It keeps us away from all the material affection.
The material energy does not act upon the living entity when he takes this Krishna Prasadam.
And also Srila Prabhupada explains in the purport, it develops fine brain tissues which helps a person in clear thinking.
Just like certain substances, drugs or marijuana or liquor, chloroform, when it goes, it induces tamasic nature.
A person is not able to see, think clearly.
Similarly, there are a few things which help a person to see things clearly.
That is Krishna Prasadam. Fine tissues will develop.
Then a person will have clear thinking. He will understand spiritual life.
So that's vegan, non vegan. This thing, this is mental concoction.
People keep on changing. Few things are good about vegan diet.
They're concerned about not harming the animals, but they are also having many, many concoctions.
And it is not the correct thing to follow.
Correct thing is to offer everything to Krishna, what Krishna recommends in Bhagavad Gita and take that food.
Prabhu, the ghost is there in Kali Yuga. Yes, in all the yogas ghosts are there.
In Kali Yuga, many people are becoming ghosts.
Why many suicides are happening? People do not know.
Many times suicides happen because of ghostly influence.
People are very angry and doing this thing.
So ghost, not that you will see rolling eyes and all these things.
That also you will see sometimes.
But when the ghost becomes very, very heavy upon the body, then you will see all these symptoms.
Otherwise you can see a person is very angry, shouting within the family.
They are fighting or he's trying to commit suicide.
All these tendencies are because of ghosts.
So by chanting Hare Krishna mantra, ghosts will not stay in our room house.
No, you chant nicely. Wonderful Kirtan you do for a long time and the ghost will go away.
I'm visiting regularly is gone temple at Kondava Pune, but I'm not doing mala japa.
Now I want to do mala japa, but due to lockdown can't go to temple for purchase mala.
Now guide me. How can I do it?
So in your house you can make mala.
Any beads are good if you can have.
If you do not have beads, you can cut some cotton stripes from any cloth.
And then from cotton you can make knots.
And then on that you can chant.
So in this way, some mala can be created at house and you can do if it is not possible at all,
then wait till the lockdown gets lifted.
It will get lifted till then.
You can set some time for you and then you can chant very, very attentively for that thing.
But mala is important.
As soon as this lockdown is lifted, please go and take mala.
Hare Krishna Prabhu, as we are learning new concepts from Bhagavad Gita every day,
but how can we recollect every day's learning?
So you have to same thing.
Just like how do we recollect the lessons learned in our regular subjects?
We revisit it.
We can take some notes.
So Bhagavad Gita is there with you.
Prabhupada books dot com.
I will write here so you can all visit that website.
This is the website.
Prabhupada books dot com.
You can visit it and you will find Bhagavad Gita over there.
So read the purport, the explanation, read the notes and revise it.
And very important to preach.
When you preach, explain this knowledge to others.
The knowledge gets digested very nicely.
You told Krishna has already decided duties for us.
How do we become aware of our duties?
You told that after Prabhupada, there is no physically alive and bona fide spiritual master.
So whom should we approach to know about our duties?
How should we know that he is well aware of Krishna's plan for us?
So it is not that after Prabhupada, Prabhupada is still there.
The existence that is called something called Prakat Leela and Aprakat Leela.
Prakat means manifest, where it is visible.
Prabhupada's form is visible.
And now Prabhupada is also running the same institution, but in an invisible way.
If the liberated personalities, gurus also are under control of death, then where is the question of our liberation?
They are not controlled by death and all.
They are eternal and they are eternally guiding the living entities.
So Srila Prabhupada's guidance was taken then also.
Even at that time, devotees cannot personally ask Prabhupada.
So Prabhupada, what should I do? Should I do this job or that job?
Should I do this thing or the other thing?
Prabhupada had lakhs of followers and thousands and thousands of full time missionaries like us.
So hardly you can count on fingers.
Few people were able to see Prabhupada and they also were not able to have such direction.
So Prabhupada had set up an institution.
This is a Vedic culture like Durvasamani.
He would walk with 60,000 disciples, Mahabharata explains.
Now 60,000 disciples, if they ask questions like this, Durvasamani will not be able to answer also.
So that is why how one guru would manage the gurukul, he will teach the senior most disciples.
They will teach their juniors, they would teach their juniors, their juniors.
In this way, gurus' instruction will flow down, will come down.
So this is how Prabhupada's institution was running before also and is running now also.
So Prabhupada has made authorities for us.
So the devotee who is in touch with you, you can seek his guidance.
And whatever he tells, we have to follow that spiritual instruction.
And yes, Prabhupada also told that it is not a one way process.
If something is there you feel to discuss, you please discuss.
Prabhu, I think I should follow like that.
But after discussion, the final decision should be taken from the devotees.
That is guru's instruction for us.
And if we are not satisfied with that devotee, so then we can go to his authority who is guiding that devotee.
Prabhupada tells it is just like Sessions Court.
You have to follow Sessions Court.
But then if you are dissatisfied with the decision, you can move to High Court.
Because the devotees may not be as pure as their spiritual master, especially in case of Srila Prabhupada.
Nobody is even a fig as compared to the purity of Prabhupada.
But nevertheless, the entire system has been set up by Prabhupada.
So it works perfectly.
So if you are not satisfied with the devotees whom we are in touch with,
then we can very humbly approach their authorities just like High Court.
Again, you are dissatisfied, you can approach Supreme Court, their authorities.
But the court has to be followed.
And unless we approach higher authority, we have to approach our immediate authority.
Just like you cannot tell who cares for Sessions Court.
Anyway, High Court can change their decision.
I will not follow, no.
As long as High Court does not change, does not put stay, you have to follow that decision, implement that thing.
So in this way, please try to understand.
Nothing happens by chance.
Krishna is seated in the heart.
So whatever is due to us, whatever has to come as per our karma will come to us.
Good things or bad things.
It is not that by chance I committed a mistake in following, so I am suffering.
No, you cannot suffer more than destiny.
You cannot enjoy more than destiny.
So thus we should simply follow the duty.
Now the duty is given by the spiritual master.
This institution is giving for all the people who are connected.
In this way, our duties are decided.
So a devotee has no confusion in life at all what to do.
He simply asks his authorities and it is clear.
So in this way, we can be aware of Krishna's plan for us.
We have to follow immediate authority.
If anyone worships his Kuldevi or Devata along with Krishna, then what is the result?
We saw here in this shloka, Krishna told today,
So a person who has worshipped the Devatas, he will go to Devata.
If he is worshipping Krishna, he will go to Krishna.
But only Krishna he has to worship.
He is worshipping Krishna also and Devata also.
Krishna may arrange some unique configuration for that person.
But whoever is the object of greatest attachment, a person will go there.
If he is attached to very much a person, he will go to that place.
That is why those people who are very much attached to their families,
their houses, their properties, they become ghosts.
They roam around that place only.
They are not willing to go to next body.
So whatever is our subject matter of attachment,
a person takes birth accordingly and goes to that object.
I think there is no ghost.
There is only a negative energy because of human behavior of saying things,
adding the extra entertaining things.
This becomes ghost.
Can you put some light on it?
No, we have to understand our thinking is not important.
People keep on thinking in various ways.
But Krishna is telling here,
Bhutani yanti bhutejya bhuta ijya.
One worships ijya, bhuta.
He goes to bhutas, he goes to the ghosts.
And the description is also given very nicely.
So if you have any doubt, you can visit that Mahindipur Balaji temple is there in Rajasthan.
So if you have any doubts about ghosts, you can visit Mahindipur Balaji temple.
If you have doubts about ghosts, you can visit there.
And all the doubts will be very very clear.
So all the scriptures they tell it.
Great description is there about Bhutloka,
about Bhutas, Pishachas, Pretas, Kushmandas, Brahma Rakshasas.
Various kinds of Bhutas are there.
So all the description we will find in the Vedas.
So it is a fact.
Many things we cannot perceive from our eyes.
Krishna Lok we cannot perceive.
Even we cannot perceive ourselves within the body.
We cannot perceive coronavirus within the body.
We have to take help of people who know it.
So that's first principle of spiritual life is I should not depend upon my senses for knowing truth.
This is called science.
Only foolish people, they depend upon their senses for ascertaining what is truth.
Intelligent people, they try to take knowledge from perfect source.
If I do my job seriously, then will Lord be happy with me?
If you do your job seriously and offer the result to Krishna and do your job thinking of Krishna, then Krishna will be happy.
Simply doing job will not make one person happy.
Neither Krishna happy.
Offering the results to Krishna and thinking about Krishna, they are important.
Krishna told all beings are in him, but he is not in them.
How when he himself told he enters in every atom as Shri Radhakshaya Vishnu.
Please ask this question to the devotee whom we are in touch with because many people are new here to discuss these concepts.
How can I reach spiritual world Goloka Vrindavan in this lifetime only by completely surrendering to spiritual master
and following his instructions?
No power in the world can stop us from going back to God in this very lifetime.
Should we stop taking dairy products like milk because I saw a video that cows are constantly tortured.
Yes, so we should try to ascertain that our milk is coming from a healthy source.
But nevertheless, in devotees case, it is different because the milk that we are taking, we offer to Krishna.
So that work out anyway it is going to die and that milk of that cow when you offer to Krishna.
So it is cows service cows energy, which is offered to Krishna.
So go immediately gets promoted to a better form for advancement in spiritual life could get a human form.
Also part as any flower.
If it comes from a plant to be offered to Krishna, the plant immediately gets promoted to human form.
Rather than waiting for many, many, many lives to slowly get promoted to human form.
So that's a devotee may take and offers to Krishna in this way that cow is also getting benefited.
For focus on studies, I meditate by listening to Om Namah Shivaya Mantra.
Should I switch to Hare Krishna Mantra?
Which one is better?
So here we have seen clearly Krishna tells,
Always keep on chanting my name.
So chanting Krishna's name is supreme topmost.
All the other mantras are recommended so that person can slowly as we understood here.
Unless a person comes to worship of Krishna, he will fall down.
He has not reached the ultimate platform.
So if you are still attached to Lord Shiva very much, you can chant Om Namah Shivaya.
But thinking that he is the greatest devotee of Krishna.
And as we discussed in the last class, you don't ask any boon from Lord Shiva.
But ask him, please guide me who is supreme personality.
And please give me the greatest benediction of life.
If you want to give.
So that's in this way.
If you ask Lord Shiva, please guide me.
What is truth? Who is God?
And give me the greatest benediction.
Then Lord Shiva will guide you like that.
And if you can understand Bhagavad Gita very nicely, then it is told.
If you worship Krishna, just like you water, put water on the roots.
All the trees, all the branches of the trees are satisfied.
Similarly, all the devatas are satisfied by chanting the names of Krishna.
What will happen to a person born in typical Brahmin family but became atheist due to today's education system?
Though he is good and honest person due to family sanskaras, but does not believe in God, will he progress in next life?
No, he will not progress.
So taking birth is one thing.
You got admission in very good college, but in college you did not study how you'll get job.
So that is a good platform to advance.
But if you don't follow, a person may become demon also in next life.
I accept that Shatriya has to involve in gambling when challenged, but using Draupadi as a commodity in gamble seems immoral.
Kindly explain, Prabhu.
It seems immoral.
But then what was the situation at that time?
We are to ask Maharaj Yudhishthir only.
So these laws of karma are very, very complicated.
Just like gambling also appears not right on the part of Yudhishthir, but we understood today.
Similarly, some understanding can be there.
But we are not concerned with all these material laws which Krishna himself tells are very complex to understand.
That is why people hire lawyers and CAs to understand these laws.
So what to speak of laws of nature?
There are 20 dharmashasras and very, very complex.
So Krishna tells, sar dharman parityajya, simply surrender unto me and you are above the laws of nature.
Should we stop taking? I explained.
How can you know your position in Lord Krishna's mind?
What Lord Krishna is thinking of you?
How can you know that Krishna only will know what he is thinking of us?
Prabhu, when someone tries to make you angry on petty things,
how to control oneself and make oneself aware that we are soul?
By constantly chanting Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
The anger happens because of rajoguna and tamoguna in the heart.
Kaamesha, krodhesha, rajoguna samudbhava.
So the three modes act through the heart of the person.
So when Krishna is situated in the heart, there is no chance of the material energy to infect us.
So that is why in order to avoid anger, in order to avoid greed, in order to avoid the lust,
the three doorways to hell, the solution is always keep on chanting the names of Krishna.
By this slowly we will be able to keep Krishna in our heart when the heart is pure.
So as soon as you notice, even if you are not able to chant always, it is difficult for most of us.
But as soon as you notice anger is coming, immediately start chanting Hare Krishna
and keep on chanting until your mind becomes very peaceful.
I am having doubt in how Brahma was having a physical body apart from gross elements
with only mind, intelligence and false ego.
But the ghosts having above couldn't have one.
I don't understand the question with only mind, intelligence.
I don't understand the language. Maybe you can please reframe it.
Gambling is against the Regulative Principle. So why did Yudhishthira Maharaj entered into gambling?
Which is greater Dharma, Kshatriya Dharma or Regulative Principle?
Gambling is against the Regulative Principle, but not for a Kshatriya.
Killing is against the Regulative Principle, but not for the Kshatriya.
If a Brahman kills, it is great sin for him. But if a Kshatriya kills, it is recommended for him.
So in this way, there are some wrong things, just like telling lies.
It is sinful, but for a merchant, it is allowed.
If a businessman tells that this is the cost in which I have purchased,
nobody will put faith on him. They will bargain even more and the poor person will never make profit.
So he can tell some lies. No, no, no. Actually, this is a cost.
I am giving you at a special rate.
In this way, a merchant can tell some lies so that he can make profit. This is allowed.
But nevertheless, lying is sinful. All these things.
That is why he has to follow, offer the results of his activities to Krishna
and offer all the food that he is offering to Krishna.
He'll be free of sinful activities.
So sins and pious activities, they are two wheels of a chariot of this life, this human body.
It is not possible to have only pure life since will happen.
So how to come out of the results of sinful activity for every householder?
There is a recommended five kinds of sacrifice a person has to do every day.
Thus he becomes freed from the sinful activities.
However, that is not possible now in Kali Yuga.
So in Kali Yuga, what do we do?
We simply offer the results to Krishna, chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra
and offer the food to Krishna and take only Krishna Prasadam.
We become free from the sins.
