Jai Shri Krishna, Jai Tanya, Prabhu Nityananda, Shri Advaita Gadadhara, Shrivasadi Gaur Bhakta Vrinda.
So I hope all of you are chanting this Hare Krishna Maha Mantra as much as possible throughout the day
and with discipline few rounds on beads as well as we did now.
So we are doing the 9th chapter of Bhagavad Gita, the most confidential knowledge.
Lord Krishna has explained so far we have seen
that this knowledge is most confidential.
Rajvidya means the king of knowledge.
Of all the knowledge, of all the libraries, whatever we have online, offline in this world,
the summit, the highest knowledge is found here.
Krishna is explaining the 9th chapter of Bhagavad Gita.
So it is so very important.
And Krishna tells that it is very easy to perform also.
And then Krishna explains if it is so easy to perform,
it is most confidential knowledge.
And it is so powerful that it gives you perception of the self.
There could be many confusions.
What is self? What is soul? Who am I? Where am I? What does soul look like?
So all these things a person can perceive practically.
A person can practically feel spiritual advancement
and perceive spiritual realities by following this knowledge.
And it is very easy to perform.
Then what is the challenge? Why people are not able to perform?
So that also Lord Krishna explains.
So why people are not able to perform?
Because
the people are not able to put faith.
Faith is a very important factor.
And we all have this realization.
Just like a child, it has faith.
When it holds the finger of the father,
oh my father is with me.
Nobody can do any harm.
No person can harm me.
Great faith a child has.
So a child is very very peaceful
as long as he is walking with his father.
So in order to have that same mindset,
such amazing peace of mind, feeling such protection,
no power in the world can harm me,
faith is important.
But the child's faith is in ignorance.
He thinks his father is strongest, but that is not fact.
When he grows up, he realizes,
oh my daddy is not strongest.
What he speaks is not always perfect.
So thus that faith is called faith in ignorance.
Just like a rabbit, when the tiger is chasing,
the rabbit closes its eyes.
And it thinks, oh, the tiger is gone.
I am safe now.
So it feels great safety on closing its eyes.
But that is actually not the right understanding.
Although he's having firm faith,
the tiger has gone by closing my eyes.
But this is not right faith, faith in ignorance.
So that is why we need to have transcendental faith.
So faith in Krishna comes.
We discussed in previous classes
when a person is on should the satvik platform,
when a person rises from tamoguna to rajoguna to satwaguna
and then jumps from satwaguna to should the satwaguna.
As long as he's under satwaguna, rajoguna or tamoguna,
a person cannot understand God, God-consciousness.
And we also discussed, just like people were asking,
why there are contradictions, Prabhu?
We hear these scriptures in this.
Some personalities mentioned as supreme.
Another scripture, another personality is mentioned as supreme.
And the worship is recommended
because we have to consult Ved Vyas who has given us all the scriptures.
So especially the Puranas, these contradictions you'll find
because these Puranas are meant for the gradual elevation of people
from tamoguna to satwaguna.
So there are tamasik Puranas.
Six Puranas are tamasik for those people who are greatly, highly in ignorance.
Six Puranas are rajasik Puranas.
Those people who are passionate, want to enjoy their senses.
And then a person who has come to satwaguna for his further elevation,
satvik Puranas are there.
And then final Purana is Shrimad Bhagavatam,
in which there are no three modes.
Satwaguna, rajaguna, tamoguna.
Shrimad Bhagavatam is completely pure.
So in this manner we understood that a person has to rise from tamoguna to satwaguna.
And when he transcends satwaguna,
he is able to reach the platform of satwaguna transcendental.
Means transcending all the three modes.
Beyond rajaguna, tamoguna, beyond all the material energies.
When a person is acting on spiritual energy, spiritual platform,
then he can understand God consciousness.
All these concepts very, very easily.
So if a person somehow is not able to keep himself or put himself on Shuddha Satwaguna,
he will not be able to put faith in this knowledge.
So that's because of this lack of faith, a person is not able to advance.
Although this process is very simple and offers the most sublime highest results,
but because of faithlessness,
faithlessness happens because person does not follow rules and regulations nicely
for elevating himself to Shuddha Satvic platform.
So those people who are lazy or too passionate,
both of them cannot follow, cannot rise themselves to the Shuddha Satvic platform.
So such people are always doubtful.
They keep on committing some mistakes and they get carried away by the senses.
And as long as these things are happening, we cannot understand knowledge.
As Chanakya says, a person who has not been able to control the senses,
a person who is enjoying his senses,
where is the question of knowledge for him?
And the person who has attained knowledge,
where is the question of sense enjoyment for him?
Because as long as a person is enjoying the senses,
there is no question of right knowledge.
And when he gets right knowledge, he is not able to,
because all this sensual enjoyment that we see around us is illusory enjoyment.
He cannot take pleasure in this low-grade enjoyment.
Then Krishna told, we understood,
what is the situation of those people who are able to understand this knowledge?
Krishna explains that I am sustaining the entire world.
All the living entities, they are resting on my energy.
I create this entire universe, rather all the universes,
and I destroy those universes.
The universe stays for one kalpa.
We discussed how long is one kalpa.
It is lakhs and lakhs of years.
So everything is perfectly under control of Krishna.
Krishna is telling, I control everything.
I create and I destroy.
The entire world is under my control.
And those people who know this,
who are they?
They are called mahatma, who are able to put faith
that Krishna is the creator and Krishna is the destroyer.
And Krishna is not simply some energy, but Krishna is a person.
Krishna is a person like us.
Like us means he is having two hands.
We are like Krishna, rather.
So Krishna is a person.
Krishna is not some imaginary character
or a great man who became God,
but Krishna is always God and a person who is the original creator.
A person who has such an understanding,
he is called mahatma.
So there are two energies of Krishna
under which the third energy takes shelter.
So one is called devim prakritim
and another is mohinim prakritim shrita.
Krishna mentions here.
So devim prakritim means Krishna's internal energy.
Just like the government.
Government has one civil department and criminal department also.
We follow all the civil laws very very nicely here.
And those people who break these laws,
who want inordinate enjoyment,
they are put into jail.
And then jail department is separate.
Jail is also not so bad.
Jail is also beautiful if you enter inside.
When first time I visited jail I was very small
and one of our relatives, he was a jailer.
And so far I had seen only in the movies what a jail looks like.
And I thought as soon as I enter
there would be criminals, they would be beaten with rods and everything.
It would be horrible, so many cells over there, dark cells.
But when I entered the jail,
then I saw it is so nice.
So many nice gardens.
There was rose garden inside the jail
and nicely maintained lawns.
And then some puris were being made inside the jail.
I thought jail is not so bad.
Jail is also good.
So in jail also they have facilities and some higher prisoners.
They can play badminton also in the jail.
They have such freedom.
They can have newspaper also.
And they can have attached toilet also.
They can have mosquito repellent also.
All these facilities will be there.
And there is a dark cell also in the jail.
And third degree torture will be there.
All these things are also there.
Similarly, in material world, there are some better facilities.
Even in some countries like developed nations,
much, much better facilities than our country.
You go to higher planets, much better facilities.
But ultimately this material world is compared to a prison house.
Because despite all these facilities, there is always disturbance.
You cannot call the person who is living in jail, he is very fortunate.
No.
A person can be relatively more happy, but he is very, very conditioned in jail.
There is no comparison of enjoyment that a person can have within the jail and outside the jail like us.
In a similar fashion, the liberated living entities who are not envious of Krishna,
who are not under the process of birth and death taking these material bodies like us,
they are directly taken care of by Krishna's internal energy.
And those living entities who are criminals, who want to become God,
who want to dominate over other living entities,
who are only interested in their own sense enjoyment, personal enjoyment.
They don't care for any other living.
They care as long as the other living entities serving the purpose of their enjoyment.
As long as my enjoyment is disturbed, OK, goodbye.
So these kind of living entities, selfish and envious living entities are put into this material world.
So this material world has got a purpose.
Just like the jails, they are called reformation centers in the US.
So it is meant to reform the prisoners.
That is why these days they are stopping the killing also because the purpose is to reform the living entity.
You put him in the jail after so much freedom is being restricted,
some punishment is being given for 15, 20, 30 years he has served the punishment.
He will come to his senses. Oh, I should not commit this mistake again.
They are supposed to get reformed in a similar fashion.
This material world is meant for our reformation.
But Krishna is so kind.
He is not like a ruthless autocrat who will punish the people who do not, who disobey him, who don't want to live with him.
No, Krishna's arrangement is so nice that Krishna tells you go into the material world.
But please follow these rules and regulations for enjoyment.
If you follow those rules and regulations, then we can enjoy so-called pleasures of this material world.
Sheela Prabhupada very nicely explains that you can enjoy whatever tendencies you have.
And then if you follow the Vedas, there will be no disturbance.
You will be peacefully living in this material world.
And after whatever tendencies you had of enjoyment, you finish those enjoyment and then you go back to Godhead, go back to spiritual world.
But when the living entities do not follow these Vedas, they do not follow the law book, then there is punishment.
So it is not that Krishna tells either you live with me, serve me in the spiritual world.
Otherwise I will punish you in the material world. No.
So Krishna's arrangement is so nice. Krishna stands there.
Please follow the rules and regulations because all living entities are here to enjoy.
So there are some rules and regulations for you. Enjoy as per that.
And all the rules and regulations, they are meant so that living entity can ultimately rise to the status of Mahatma.
What is this Mahatma?
How does a Mahatma behave?
He is always chanting the names of Krishna.
This is how a Mahatma is understood.
So very, very clearly it is mentioned.
And with great determination, he is endeavouring to advance, not in material affairs, material pleasures, but for spiritual life.
So Mahatma understands,
I am the origin of all the Bhutas, all the living entities, the material ingredients.
And thus he is always chanting the names of Krishna.
And with great determination, he is advancing, trying to advance in spiritual life.
However, there are some people who are not on this level, who can always chant the names of Krishna.
And they are trying to attain Krishna consciousness.
Then who are those people that we will see today?
Lord Krishna describes in further verses.
I am sharing the screen here.
Please try to read the verses carefully.
Today we will be covering more than a couple of verses.
I hope you are all able to see the PPT.
Manoj, you are able to see?
You can do a thumbs up if you are seeing.
Yeah. Okay.
So, so clearly it is mentioned, you can see in the Bhagavad Gita.
If you simply read the Bhagavad Gita, everything is clear.
Krishna does not tell that a person who is jnani, he is the topmost.
A person who is karmic, who is doing his duties, actions nicely, he is the topmost.
Krishna is telling,
A person who is always chanting my name, he is mahatma.
A person who is doing bhajan, who is engaged in my service,
with great determination, he is mahatma.
One person who is a devotee, who is doing bhajan, bhajanti.
Ananya manasa, without any deviation, who is doing bhajan, who is a devotee,
who is rendering service, he is called mahatma.
Only a devotee is mahatma.
Any other person cannot use the title mahatma, nor he should be treated like mahatma.
Because Krishna is telling,
You can see the word here, the last word of first line.
There are others who are not mahatmas.
In the previous verse, Krishna describes the behaviour of mahatma.
Without any deviation, not that little I will serve Krishna, little Prabhu let me also enjoy.
I have some life.
As soon as you think you can enjoy without Krishna, it is as foolish as finger thinking.
Let me enjoy the gulab jamun directly.
Let me not give to stomach now. Let me not pick it today.
No, it will never happen.
Finger has to put in the stomach, then finger can be healthy.
So in a similar fashion, when a person without any deviation,
just like mother is always thinking about the welfare of the child,
and for the welfare of child, she can sacrifice anything.
In a similar fashion, devotee is always thinking about Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, bhajanti and anya manasa.
He is always thinking how to serve, how to serve,
and he is chanting the names of Krishna with great determination.
He is a mahatma.
Others who are not mahatma,
they follow the path of gyan, knowledge.
With knowledge, they want to understand what is the absolute truth.
Who am I? What is this body? What is the purpose?
So here there are three categories Krishna describes.
Those people who follow the path of knowledge.
They are also worshipping Krishna,
but not in the proper format.
How these people worship Krishna?
First category of gyanis, he thinks,
I am the, I am Krishna.
I am not this body, I am spirit soul,
but Krishna is also spirit.
I am also spirit. I am also Krishna.
So he worships his own self.
So you will find some people who tell,
I am also God. You are also God.
You don't realize.
When you do self-realization, you will realize,
you are also God.
There is no difference between you and God.
And these people, they put flowers over God
and put flowers over themselves also.
I am God.
All glories unto me.
So that is one category.
I was following one such guru before I came in
under shelter of Philip Prabhupada.
So they do their own abhishek.
They throw flowers upon themselves.
So Ekatvena, I am God.
You are God. This is the philosophy.
So they cannot be called mahatmas.
Prithakthvena, there are other people.
Prithakthvena, prithak means Krishna describes here.
Others who are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge.
Others who are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge
worship the Supreme as one of the great sages.
They are known as one without second,
diverse in many and in the universal form.
So diverse in many, that is called prithakthvena.
They imagine that the Supreme Lord is actually formless.
So very nice example is there.
So a train was coming.
Srila Bhakti Siddhanta Maharaj explains.
And the train, it was a new feature for many people.
They had only seen bullock carts and horse carts so far.
So the train was coming to the village for the first time.
And three people were chosen, the scholars of the village.
Please find out what is a train actually.
Train aare yeh, train aare yeh, kaun aare yeh, kya hoti yeh train.
To jaa ke pata laga.
So immediately they went and they are seeing where is train.
It was pitch dark at night, train was coming.
And they heard announcement is their train aare yeh.
And then they see there is loud horn honking very loudly.
You know, train honks very loudly.
And then there is light of the engine, very bright light.
And immediately became so excited.
I have seen train, I have seen train.
And immediately went back to the village to tell what is a train.
What is a train?
Train is a bright light and it produces some sound.
He told this is train.
He could not see anything else.
For him train means bright light and some sound along with that.
That is train.
Other two people they stayed back.
And then slowly this other person started seeing a very big cart,
a steel cart engine having light.
And this thing it was coming and having some wheels.
And he ran back.
No, no, actually I will tell you what is a train.
Train is a very big steel cart.
It runs without horse, without any bullocks.
It has many, many wheels.
This is what a train is like.
And then the third person stayed back.
And then he understood, oh, there are so many people sitting inside.
And then he understood there are so many persons and a person is operating the train.
It is not impersonal.
So thus the spiritualists, when they try to see on their own senses,
try to discover God, they are not able to understand the personal feature of God.
They think it is something impersonal, some light or something, some energy.
So now the purpose of this life is to get absorbed in that absolute truth,
get absorbed in God.
And they tell God is light.
It is difficult to meditate upon light or energy.
So they tell you can imagine that light taking any form, that energy taking any form.
And thus they worship God in any form that they like.
They worship God as Indra.
They worship God as Chandra.
They worship God as Shiva.
They worship God as Durga.
They worship God as Ganesha.
And also they worship God as Vishnu.
But they don't have faith that this is the actual form.
They think this is imaginary form.
Ultimately, you have to, in order to meditate, you need a form.
So as long as you are not liberated, you have to use any form.
You want to meditate upon God as a feminine character,
you can imagine that God is a female, God is Durga.
And he does not have faith in Durga, but he thinks I can imagine God in such a way.
And they tell when you are liberated, there is no more requirement of doing all these things.
So this is called Prithaktavena.
They imagine any form of God and they start worshiping those forms.
So that is how this number is very, very large in our country.
People think all are forms of God.
All the devatas are forms of God.
And you can worship anything and that is equal to worship of God.
However, the Vedas say differently.
The Shastras still, even to the extent that the topmost demigods, Rudra and Brahma,
it is told,
It is told,
If a person, he is thinking Brahma and Rudra, Brahma and Shiva, etc.
He is thinking they are on same level as that of Lord Vishnu.
Then that person is called atheist.
He does not have faith in God.
He does not have faith in the Vedas.
So thus the Vedas are so direct.
They mention very, very clearly who is a Supreme Personality of God.
However, only a Mahatma can realize this.
So those who are not Mahatma, they tell these philosophies that there are many, many forms.
Hindu religion is so liberal.
You can worship any form.
However, Lord Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita, it is not fact.
Prithaktavena is not Mahatma.
There are others, but these are still better.
Even though he is doing his own worship, that is also sometimes recommended because at least he is trying to approach transcendental platform.
He understands that this body is not all in all.
I am different from this body.
I am spirit soul and God is also spirit.
However, some people, some Gyanis, they cannot think of anything beyond this matter, material nature.
And they think God means this.
Everything is God.
Whatever you see around you, you are seeing trees.
You are seeing water.
You are seeing hills, mountain.
Everything is God.
So these people, they simply worship the nature that is called universal form of Lord.
This entire universe, they think this is only God.
We are part and parcel of God.
We are also occupying some matter in this universe.
So we are also part of God in that way.
And God means this entire universe.
Whatever form we are seeing, this is God.
So these mountains, they are the bones of God.
And these trees and herbs and plants, they are the hairs on the body of God.
In this way, they meditate upon God by meditating upon this entire nature.
And they see this entire nature in the form of a personality that is called Virat Roop, universal form.
So the Gyanis who are not Mahatmas, they follow this path.
And there are other people who are not even Gyanis.
They are called Karmis.
Aham Kartur, they do various Yajnas to satisfy their sensual desires.
So Krishna is telling for them, those people who are not Mahatma, Bhajanti, those who don't do devotional service,
those who are not Gyanis, they do Yajnas, they want to satisfy material desires.
Aham Kartur, Aham Yajna, Swadha Aham, Aham Aushadham, Mantro Aham, Aham Evadhyam, Aham Agnir, Aham Hutam.
Krishna is telling, I am the ritual, I am the sacrifice, offering to the ancestors, healing herb, transcendental chant,
I am the butter, fire and the offering.
So whatever butter, ghee, a person is supposed to offer into the Yajnas to produce desired result, to light the fire.
And the fire is lit by using ghee and by proper mantras and proper herbs are put into it so that the result can come out.
Krishna is telling, I am everything.
I am that yajna and I am that butter which you put into the yajna kunda and I am the offering, whatever you put and I am the herb.
I am everything.
So Krishna is explaining here, there is nothing in this universe, nothing in this world.
Everything is me. In the sense, me and my energy.
Just like the sun and the sun's energy.
It is not possible that aaj bhai sooraj ki roshni aayi, sooraj toh nahi aayi aaj, roshni aayi hai sirf, not possible.
Ya sooraj aayi aayi, kala sooraj aayi aayi, sooraj ki roshni nahi, that is also not possible.
The sun and sunlight, they exist together, that is why they can be considered one.
At the same time, sun is different from sunlight.
If we are touching the sunlight, we cannot tell I am touching the sun.
In a similar fashion, in this world there is nothing but Krishna.
It means Krishna and Krishna's energy, they are one.
Although there is difference between Krishna and Krishna's energy.
So when Krishna tells I am butter, I am fire, it means they are my energies.
So in this world there is nothing but Krishna.
That is why Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita,
Vedais cha sarvair aham eva vediyo, from all the Vedas I am to be understood.
So Krishna is the only subject matter of study of all the Vedas.
Pitaha masya jagato mata dhata pita maha vediyam pavitram omkara rik saam yajur evacha
Krishna is telling I am the pita of this Jagat.
So Lord Brahma is called pita. He is our creator.
And sometimes Lord Shiva is also called pita.
And you will find in the Vedas, all the souls are coming from Lord Shiva.
So Lord Shiva is sending the souls.
It is not that he is the original source of all souls.
But he is the source of the souls in the material world.
When the souls are put into the material world, they are put through the agency of Lord Shiva.
So in that way Lord Shiva is father.
And sometimes Lord Brahma is also considered father.
Pita. So Krishna is telling Brahma and Shiva, they are also me.
They are my expansions.
Pitaha masya jagato mata dhata pita maha.
And then Krishna is telling I am the mother also.
And I am pita maha. I am the father of father also.
If you think Brahma, Shiva, they are your pita, you are coming from them.
Then I am their father. I am pita maha.
Means I am the supreme.
Vedyam pavitram omkara rik yajur saam.
I am the father, the mother, support, grand desire.
I am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllable om.
I am also rik saam and yajur, Vedas.
So in that way Krishna is explaining there is nothing beyond Krishna.
Krishna creates, Krishna maintains.
All the Vedas are also Krishna's expansions.
Gathir bharta prabhusakshi nivasasharanam surit.
Prabhava pralayasthanam nidhanam bijam avyayam.
Gati means destination, goal.
So unless a person reaches his goal, his entire journey is considered a waste.
It is no use.
You started to reach your home, you booked a cab and he dropped you somewhere in between.
Then whatever, then it is not considered success.
It would be fruitless.
So Krishna is telling, what is the goal of all the activities that you are doing?
The goal is me.
Gati bharta, bharta means maintainer, prabhu means master, saakshi means the witness.
Nivasam sharanam, I am the shelter, I am the refuge.
I am the goal, sustainer, master, the witness, the award, the refuge and the most dear friend.
It is not that I am autocrat, I am most dear friend.
So I am refuge, I give shelter to everyone, I maintain them.
I am the creation and the annihilation, the basis of everything, the resting place and the eternal seed.
So the creation, the destruction, everything is happening basis Krishna.
And very important word which is used here is bijam avyayam.
Bijam avyayam means, bijam means seed, avyayam means eternal.
Everyone is trying to figure out from where this world has come, from where this world has come.
So here Krishna is explaining bijam avyayam.
I am the seed, usually the seed vanishes.
From the seed the tree comes out but once the tree has come out the original seed vanishes.
But Krishna tells I am eternal seed.
I am the source of this entire world but I never vanish, I always exist.
Some people tell yes God created the world but now God is dead after creating the world.
Krishna is telling no, bijam avyayam.
I am the creator but I am eternal.
I control the heat, the rain and the drought.
I am immortality and I am also death personified.
Both being and non-being are in me.
So if there is excess heat it is because of Krishna.
Krishna is controlling the heat.
When we are having fever there is more heat in the body or there is more heat in the universe.
It is under control of Krishna, nothing is by chance.
The rain and also drought.
I am immortality and I am also death personified.
Both being and non-being are in me.
So Krishna is also controlling death.
So if people are dying it is Krishna's desire that they die.
Now this is very important question.
We should ask after reading this.
If Krishna is the cause of all the heat of this world.
Krishna is the cause when rains do not happen.
And it is because of Krishna that people are dying.
Why Krishna is killing everyone in this creation?
And Krishna tells in previous shloka that he is best friend.
So if Krishna is best friend why he is killing all of us?
And many people tell that if I do good activity.
What is the need of following spiritual life?
So what is that good activity we should ask?
Which can stop our death?
Because if we are dying it means we are still criminals only.
Hardcore criminals are killed.
They are given capital punishment.
So if by doing any activity your death can be stopped.
That is actually a good activity.
From the perspective of Krishna.
From the absolute platform.
As long as any activity does not stop our death.
Or any other person's death.
That activity is still sinful.
That is why it is told in Chaitanya Charita Amrita.
Good and bad everything is illusion here in this world.
Because ultimately whether you do bad activity.
Or you do so called good activity.
They cannot stop your death.
Means you are still a hardcore criminal.
The question is what is then a good activity?
The good activity is the activity which can stop our death.
Then we are no more criminals.
So I wanted to explain one more very important point.
But today we are running short of time.
As we know there is lamp lighting ceremony.
So Prabhu everything should be done for the pleasure of Krishna.
Where is Krishna's pleasure in showing the lamp?
So should we show the lamp or we should not show the lamp?
No.
So that is why Krishna consciousness does not mean changing the activities or this thing.
It means simply change of consciousness.
So an entire thing can be spiritualized if it is done through Krishna.
So what we can do now is we will all participate in the lamp offering.
Because everyone is supposed to follow the order of king and not revolt the king.
This is the duty of a citizen.
By doing these duties a person rises to the level of slowly.
Spiritual duties and gets liberated.
So we can spiritualize all duties how?
So we have to show lamp to other people in the balcony and elsewhere.
So what we can do is you can take a lamp offer it to Krishna very nicely.
And you can chant Hare Krishna Maha Mantra or other prayers that you know for the glorification of Krishna.
And then you show the lamp outside.
So all those people who see the light of that lamp they will advance spiritually.
So it becomes spiritual activity DT worship.
So thus it is so nice.
So in this way every activity can be dovetailed in Krishna consciousness.
So now we will wind up soon today.
And I know all of you are asking many many questions.
So OK one question I will take and we will finish the meeting.
Hare Krishna Prabhu if this material world is jail how did great people such as Devaki Mata and Yashoda Mata come on this planet?
Very nice question.
Krishna ne apne mahabab ko bhi jail me daal diya.
What is this?
Yes a very intelligent question.
So Sheila Prabhupada explains very nicely.
The prisoners one day saw the king is coming to jail and they thought yes now king has also committed a crime.
Now he will live with us in the jail.
King can visit the jail just to see how the things are going on.
How the management is going on to free the prisoners at times.
So in this way everyone who enters just like I also entered the jail because I was relative of the jailer.
So in this way when Krishna comes here sometimes his relatives they also come here.
In order to educate the people mainly that please there is a world when you go outside the jail this jail is not all in all come outside we will enjoy very nicely.
So thus Yashoda Krishna and all the other associates they don't come here under the control of karma and they are not punished by the laws of nature.
They are always transcendental.
They are not at all affected by the material pangs but always they are in state of constant and unlimited spiritual bliss.
So this is the state of Yashoda Devaki and all other associates of Krishna.
So with this I would end tomorrow.
I wanted to share this important point.
So we will discuss tomorrow.
So thank you so much for hearing.
