So we discussed Lord Krishna explains how people basis their consciousness.
They follow different modes of approaching the Absolute Truth and which in their perspective is going to give them happiness.
Krishna declares his position in the ninth chapter, which is very, very confidential.
Talk more secret just like many, many agents, intelligence agents.
They remain undercover, don't disclose their position.
In a similar fashion, Krishna also when he comes here, he doesn't usually, even though he declares in other incarnations apart from Lord Chaitanya,
but he doesn't give this revelation to everyone.
People are not able to understand, oh, his supreme personality of Godhead.
So it is very, very confidential because people are not interested in knowing God.
People do not want to see reality.
A person who is very fond of just watching movies remain in fiction entire day.
He's not interested in seeing reality.
So Krishna is so kind father.
He designs the world in a way so as to fulfill our desires.
So if somebody is not interested in knowing reality and the reality basis of reality is God.
So God does not reveal himself.
So Krishna declares in nine chapter his position.
And then Krishna declares those who have understood Krishna in truth, they are called Mahatma.
They are always engaged in chanting the names of Krishna and they are always engaged in worshipping Krishna with all their hearts.
And those people who cannot do that, they are in four categories.
They are not completely surrendered to Krishna.
They don't know Krishna in truth.
But then these people also approach Krishna either because they are in stress.
When a person is in stress, there is some misery in his life.
He's easily able to go to God.
He has some desires in life.
I want this.
I want that.
They also approach Krishna.
They also approach God.
A person is inquisitive.
He wants to know what is this going on?
What do these people, they sing there, they read something, they discuss, they dance.
What is this going on?
What are the Sanskrit texts written over here?
Why everyone is so fond of reading Bhagavad Gita in all the schools, management schools, international universities.
People are discussing this.
What is this Bhagavad Gita?
Out of inquisitiveness, they come to understand.
And another category, fourth category, gyani.
A person is searching after absolute truths.
So Krishna has very clearly explained himself.
Bhagavad Gita explains what is truth, what is God.
But some people who are not able to follow the simple process, which is recommended in Bhagavad Gita,
but they want to figure out on their own.
They want to do research work.
Then such people, they keep on researching, researching, researching.
Krishna does not tell a gyani is perfect person.
He can know me.
He can know me.
He tells bahunam janmanam ante gyanavan mam prapadyante.
After many, many births, a person of knowledge.
He is able to come to me.
Bahunam janmanam ante gyanavan.
Some people tell bhakti is meant for sentimentalists.
Those people who cannot understand that it is only energy, the supreme person,
they worship some form and then develop this thing.
Less intelligent people.
But Krishna is not telling like that.
Krishna is telling gyanavan, those people who want to follow the path of knowledge.
With their intelligence, they want to understand what is God.
They have to do research.
They will come to God if they are able to continue this research, not just for this life.
Bahunam janmanam many, many, many births.
They have to die and take birth, die and take birth and keep on researching, keep on researching.
Then after many, many births, a person is able to understand Krishna.
And what does a bhakti yogi do?
A bhakti yogi simply engages himself in the service of Krishna
and Krishna gives all the knowledge from the heart.
Being pleased by the love and the service offered by the devotee.
However, not everyone is able to be at this level.
Then they follow the next level, gyaana yajna.
They want to do research and we discussed in the previous session.
Those people who follow this path of gyaana, what do they do?
Either they worship God as some energy.
If you want to see sun from your naked eyes, when the sunshine is very, very bright,
you may just see some light emitting from the sun without seeing the actual shape of sun.
So when a person wants to understand God using his own senses, which are but limited,
we cannot see even coronavirus, how you can see God.
So when you want to see God using your own senses, you get dazzled by the spiritual light,
which is emanating from the body of God.
And then such people think that actually God is only that light, consciousness,
and I am also consciousness, so I am God.
So they tell I am God, you are God, everyone is God.
Another category of people, they imagine, no, light you cannot meditate upon.
Meditation is required to gain liberation.
You can imagine that light has taken some form and you worship that form.
Third category of people, they don't have understanding of spirit.
They think matter is all in all.
And this entire universe, what we see around us, is God.
God is nothing but the nature, but the universe.
Hills, mountains, valleys, all put together.
The universe has some intelligence and it is God.
So they meditate upon the universe, universal form, we are true.
So then Krishna gave the understanding that third level,
topmost level, second level, and even basic level,
some people are not at all interested in knowing what is truth.
What do such people do?
Prabhupada tells if you call some dogs here, please come and hear Bhagavad Gita, come sit.
Will they come and sit here Bhagavad Gita? No.
Dog has no inquisitiveness. You give some chapati to dog, what dog will do?
You give some biscuits to dog, what dog will do?
It will pounce upon you. Give me, give me. It will jump immediately.
And sometimes the guests, they visit us and we offer them something.
We give them some biscuits, something to eat.
What do they do? They also jump.
Yes, give me. No.
They tell you, you also please take. Yes, we will take together.
You take, I'll take, everyone takes.
And in this way they do.
Devotees chant the Maha Prasada Mantra.
They express their gratitude for God.
In this way they are able to do.
So Prabhupada tells this is human life.
Human life means it is meant for first of all control.
Now people tell become reckless.
Do whatever you want to do. This life is all in all.
There is no enjoyment. You will die.
So be reckless without any control and joy.
That is animal life without any control.
Human being means control.
So the more you are able to control yourself, your mind and senses, the more you are becoming human.
Otherwise animal.
So animal has no developed intelligence.
Similarly, animal simply wants to satisfy senses.
So some people who do not have profound intelligence to understand God,
nor do they have inquisitiveness to understand God,
they have no interest in understanding what is truth of life.
What do these people do for them?
Enjoyment means let me satisfy the senses somehow.
But if they are also pious, they are not very, very sinful.
They follow Karmakanda section of the Vedas.
Rig Veda, Gyan, Sam Veda, Yajur Veda, Atharva Veda.
Originally there was one Veda, Atharva Veda.
It got divided into further three Vedas.
Rig Yajur and Sam Veda.
So these Vedas mainly discuss Karmakanda section.
You do something for material returns.
Thus we don't read Vedas and Lord Krishna also rejects Vedas.
That Arjuna, there is no need of reading the Vedas.
They talk only about the three modes of nature, this material world.
You do this thing, you get that.
You do this thing, you get that like that.
So this is what we discussed till yesterday.
So some people, those who are having least intelligence,
they worship, they do Karmakanda section,
they do various Yajnas for various Devatas
so that they can have some material benefit,
so that I can go to Swarga.
Just like now we hear from people,
oh that place is very nice, America is very nice if you go.
Now at least we can see America.
We have satellite vision and everything.
But earlier people would simply hear.
That is why people from Greece, from Middle East, from China,
everywhere, Europe, they would come to India.
They had heard about India.
India is a great country.
Voltaire has admitted,
Pythagoras took a long journey from Europe to come to India
so that he can learn geometry and mathematics.
So Voltaire says he would not have undertaken such an arduous journey
if the Brahmanas of India were not so famous.
So the Brahmanas, the teachers, the philosophers of this country were so famous.
From Europe, people would walk and come to our country to take education.
The first universities, Nalanda, Takshila, all were in India.
So education started from here.
So earlier people would hear, oh India is full of populace.
India is a very, very nice country.
Let us go to Bharatvarsha.
And then people, they wanted to find sea route.
Thus everyone was trying to come to India.
Who tries to go to a, just like US doesn't give visa very easily
because everyone is trying to go to US.
Similarly, why everyone was so much willing to come to India?
Because India was so full of all the opulences,
full of knowledge, full of wealth, natural resources.
That is why everyone all across the world,
how to reach India, how to reach India, they wanted to find.
In a similar fashion earlier, just like using our maps, we understand
in these coordinates, this country situated like this, you have to go.
You follow this road, you'll reach the city.
The Vedas describe the map of entire galaxy, entire universe.
In this way, you can reach this planet.
In this way, you can reach such planet.
Such kind of people live on this planet.
This kind of people, they live on other planet.
And thus going to other planets was the aim of life
because anywhere within this material world,
the facility of enjoyment is very, very less.
So people would worship various demigods
so that they can go to the required planet,
the kind of enjoyment they want.
But then Lord Krishna declared, as we understood in the last class,
After having a very long time of enjoyment on the heavenly planets,
even the punya is less.
We do some punya, good activities, just like you do some job here, you get money.
And then eventually you are able to reach your desired destination.
You want to spend time abroad or in a hotel.
You earn money, you spend money.
When the money is over, you have to come back.
Similarly, when the punya is over,
the person again comes back here to this material world.
He gets degraded.
So let us see now what Lord Krishna has to offer today in the shlokas.
So I will share the screen with you all now.
So Lord Krishna declares, today we will see verse 23,
Krishna tells,
means to sacrifice something, to offer something or to worship.
So Krishna tells,
So Krishna is telling,
Avidhi means improper way.
Avidhi purvaka means as per rules and regulations in a right manner.
Avidhi purvaka means in a wrong manner.
Yajanti avidhi purvaka.
So very clearly it is mentioned.
Krishna is telling,
Those people who offer anything to other gods,
whatever a man may sacrifice for Indra, Chandra, Brahma, other devatas,
or whatever worship they do, actually they are offering to Krishna only.
But avidhi purvaka in an improper way.
How do we understand this?
They are worshipping Krishna only, but they are worshipping in improper way.
So example given is,
just like the tree has got various twigs, branches, leaves, fruits, etc.
So if you are pouring water on any branch or any leaf,
we can say we are pouring water on the tree.
Yes or no?
Yes, we are pouring water on tree.
But avidhi purvaka in an improper way.
You are pouring water very nicely.
Yes, I want to see every leaf green.
On every leaf you are trying to pour water.
But that endeavor is useless.
Unless you pour water on the roots.
So this is very very important.
So Krishna is the root of all the devatas.
They are living, their powers are derived from Krishna.
So if a person sacrifices anything for Krishna,
then all the devatas automatically are satisfied.
But however if a person wants to do sacrifice for other living entities,
including the demigods,
neither they will be satisfied nor the person himself will be satisfied.
However this word sacrifice is very very important.
This is what I wanted to share for the last two sessions also.
So it is told in the Vedas,
in Bhagavad Gita also Lord Krishna again declares,
So Krishna is telling,
we have big big classes here.
People after crossing through
hallowed portals of top technological institutes of the country,
they are rushing for management institutes.
So management management.
Because they want good money.
Management colleges offer very good money.
And in those management colleges,
they have produced very wonderful managers, good people.
They have driven the economy very very nicely.
But in this drive for economic development,
there is one great danger which civilization is encountering.
And what is that danger?
That danger is of sustainability.
So that is why this topic they have taken now.
And in all the good management colleges,
they want to teach sustainability.
How to sustain?
How to sustain?
Because this growth that people have,
it is not sustainable.
Neither it is sustainable for a person's life.
This corporate life is horrible.
Those people who get good money,
some kind of jobs,
they tell Prabhu, this job is not sustainable.
The growth that the world has seen,
although we have made wonderful skyscrapers,
we have nice bullet trains,
we have internet, everything,
but it is not sustainable growth.
The environment is dying.
We are killing the environment, the planet,
and thus we are killing ourselves.
But everyone is clueless
how to have sustainability.
So they are not even able to sustain.
That is why people are telling
that we cannot live on this planet
for more than 100 years.
Because we have killed ourselves
using this industrial revolution.
The science has been rather
a bane than boon.
And scientists are telling now,
we are very guilty of it,
that how we are creating all the natural disasters,
we have created all these disasters.
The scientists, they have created.
So the scientists, the economists,
the capitalists, they wanted to make people happy,
create wealth,
but they are not able to provide.
The world has grown,
but this growth is not sustainable.
So how to sustain this growth,
that is why Krishna tells,
I created everyone.
I created the human race, the animals,
everyone, and I created devatas,
I created the demigods.
Just like a small child
doesn't understand who are the ministers.
So I have shared in the classes also
my father would tell me,
that this thing is run by the government.
The government runs it.
The government is increasing the salary.
The government is doing this.
So I thought, who is this government?
Government might be a lady.
Lady is very powerful.
Government is doing this thing.
Government is giving job.
So government seems to be a powerful lady.
I could not figure out who is this government.
Then I understood, oh government
means there are so many people, so many ministers.
There is transport ministry,
there is urban development ministry,
there is coal ministry, water ministry,
education ministry, external affairs ministry,
sports ministry, tribal ministry.
So many people are there.
I may not know who the person is,
but the understanding is things don't happen automatically.
So Krishna tells, I created human beings,
other species, and I created
devatas, demigods,
who are in charge of the universal affairs.
So Krishna told,
if you want sustainability,
if your country has to sustain,
you have to give tax to the government.
The government collects the taxes,
gives you the amenities,
gives you education,
gives you medical facilities, gives you roads,
ration and other facilities.
So for a sustainable
development, this taxing
taxation system is very much required.
Otherwise, how can government provide?
If government doesn't provide, how will citizens
live? So Krishna
told, this yajna is very
important. So Krishna tells,
human life actually, all
the activities that we do now, our
understanding is, whatever I do,
I do some activities so that I can
enjoy the result. Oh, let me take
this job because this job will
give me so much money and I'll enjoy all
the money, whatever I earn.
So Krishna tells, no, this is improper
understanding. This is the biggest
fault of today's education system
that there is no knowledge,
no science of yajna taught in
the schools. So it is told throughout
the Vedas in the Bhagavad Gita, which is
ABCD of spiritual life,
yajna arthaat karmano anyatra
loko yam karma bandhanaha
yajna arthaat
yajna arthaat karmanaha
All the activities
should be done for yajna. Yajna
means sacrifice. All the activities
should be done so that you can sacrifice
the results of those activities,
not that you enjoy the result
of all those activities.
If you want to enjoy the result of
why I have worked hard, I have produced this,
why should I sacrifice, offer my
hard earned money or whatever I've earned.
So it is told anyatha, otherwise
if you don't do sacrifice
loko yam karma bandhanaha
you'll get trapped in the cycle of karma.
You'll become a criminal over here.
So just like if a person doesn't
pay taxes, then immediately
that person becomes a criminal.
And we can understand it is
common sense also. Why criminal? Because
the government has created some facility.
Just like we see Krishna.
He has made so many species here.
He has made so many plants.
Suppose the
grain plant, all the
grains we eat, we sustain,
annad bhavanti bhutani, if grains are
not there we cannot live. So suppose
the wheat plant tells,
oh I have been standing here
throughout the year in hot sun, bearing
the torrents of rain
and heat and everything, and then
I produce this result, these grains.
I will not give it to you.
It belongs to me. The tree may tell,
oh I have been standing here, I produce these
fruits. Mango tree tells, I will
not give fruits to human beings.
The tree tells, I will not give my wood to human
beings. I produce wood. I have produced
food. I have produced all the fruits.
They tell, no, I have been standing here
and I produce oxygen. I will not give oxygen
to human beings, plants declare.
Plant union. We have been producing
oxygen, we will not give to anybody else.
So we will die. So that is why
Srila Prabhupada tells, there is
no need of going to school.
Simply a person, if he is
intelligent and sober, he is
not bewildered by a brainwashed
civilization which teaches people
your life is meant to enjoy the
senses. And in this way you
will be happy. Foolish and childish
civilization. Unless a person
is brainwashed by
such a civilization, simply
by observing the nature, he will
get all education within the heart.
Simply intelligence is required.
Simply by observing the nature, he can
understand all the species,
whatever the fruits they are
producing, the wood that
tree is producing, it gives to human
beings. The leaves which tree is producing,
fruits that it is producing,
it gives to us. So
all the byproducts, all the producers,
the results are meant for other species
actually. Flower produces very
nice nectar and a honeybee
is able to live on that nectar, isn't it?
So if our flower tells
I will not give my nectar to you, honeybee
would die. And if honeybee dies, what
will happen? Flower would die
because the bee is going to pollinate the flowers.
In this way, very nice
symbiotic arrangement Krishna has made.
They will produce something, offer to you,
you produce something and
give it to others. Sacrifice.
At least start giving.
You cannot enjoy everything.
You are not meant to enjoy.
If a person enjoys everything
that he produces, Krishna tells
he is called thief.
That is what
Nanda Nilikni said.
If you know, I think last year or just
little before that, he offered
he pledged 50% of his
will to Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation. And when he pledged
50% of his will, 50% is a big
amount. So he told, thank
you very much. I thank Bill Gates
a lot, Bill and Melinda, because
they have enabled me to
follow the principle of Bhagavad Gita.
He is very fond of Bhagavad Gita.
They have enabled me to follow the
principle of Bhagavad Gita. What is the principle of
Bhagavad Gita? He quoted a shloka also
if you remember the news a couple of
years ago. So Nanda Nilikni
said this shloka, very famous
we all would have heard of it. It is
It is foolishness. It does not mean that.
It means
You have right to do
duty.
You don't have right upon the fruits
which you are producing from your duties.
Because the fruits are meant for
others.
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilukni said
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
Nanda Nilikni said,
We did not realize this thing will happen. If at all we are able to happen, if you join us, we will show you that great Madan Mohanji temple is there, which is one of the oldest temples of Vrindavan.
And many temples in the south, you'll find big big temples and mosques and churches also.
Whenever a person had money in the past, immediately he would spend for temple or mosque or church or like that.
Never you'll find a very big house of a person. Just see this house is there thousands of years old.
But you'll find temple which are thousands of years old, but you'll not find a house which is thousands of years old.
Why? All this money was coming from the people. There was a businessman who made Madan Mohanji temple.
Other people who made other temples, but they did not build a big house for themselves.
What do we do now? Big house. Of course, the definition of Mumbai is different. 2-3 BHK is big.
So this is our advancement. But here I want my house, whatever big house or small.
And where will Bhagawan stay? In a small cupboard.
Don't accidentally see Bhagawan. Keep Bhagawan hidden in a small cupboard.
Bhagawan sit here. Whole house is mine and you stay here. This is our understanding.
But this is not the Vedic understanding. People were knowing this result of this money doesn't belong to me.
Another example is there. So we are simply employed by Krishna.
We are not entitled to enjoy what we produce. Just like now I am speaking from Pawai.
Hiranandani township. So this Hiranandani township or any township for that matter is built by a person.
And some mazen actually would have come here and he would have put the bricks upon each other and developed entire building or a house.
Now after building a house, suppose a laborer can tell, oh, I have made this. I have laid all the bricks of this house.
I will live in this house. This house belongs to me. So this is foolishness.
You have made. But under whose direction? It is under the direction of the builder.
The builder decided township should come. So township has to come.
If the laborer mazens contract as they resign, he will hire another set of people.
In a similar fashion, Krishna tells, under my direction, everything is happening within this world,
whether some person is suffering, whether some person is enjoying, whether somebody is being killed or somebody is being fed.
It is I only who am doing Arjuna when he was not willing to fight.
Krishna told all these people I have killed by my plan. But you please, you please become instrument.
If you want the credit, I want to give you credit because you are my devotee that he has killed.
Otherwise, I have killed everyone already. So everything happens as per the plan of Krishna.
Just like it is foolish for a laborer to claim the entire house which he has made from his hands,
it is foolish for us to claim entire thing what we are producing by our hard work day and night.
Such a person is called criminal. So as soon as we stop doing Yagya, stop sacrificing the results of our activities,
we become criminals immediately. And can a criminal be happy?
Can a criminal be happy? You find peaceful criminal. Oh, just see, how peaceful a criminal is.
There is no tension. He sits very peacefully.
A criminal can become rich. A criminal can become powerful.
Thou, Dibraheem or other people, other gangsters, dons, you can become powerful.
You can become beautiful. You can have command so many people under you.
You can be wealthy, but you will never be peaceful. Never be peaceful.
Another criminal would be after you or police would be after you.
So that is the situation of people in this material world.
Many, many people, they are trying, oh, how to topple this person from the job?
How can I get his position? His position, isn't it?
Everyone is there to push us out of the job, of the business, other set of criminals.
Or government anyway is going to punish us because we are not doing sacrifice.
We are disturbing the cycle of this nature, the symbiotic and self-sustainable cycle which Krishna has created.
We are destroying it and now we have gone even a step further.
Whatever I am producing, I want to enjoy that.
I will use credit card and whatever I have not produced that also I will enjoy.
So the greed has no limits of a person, of a human being.
So thus a thief can never be happy and because we are acting like thieves,
the entire world, entire situation is being harassed by the laws of nature and they are unhappy.
So human life is meant for sacrifice. Now sacrifice for whom?
So the most foolish people who but nothing they want to enjoy in this material world,
they are told, okay, you sacrifice for this devata.
This devata has charge of material resources.
God is Durga. If you worship God is Durga,
she will empower you with all the material matter very nicely, material comforts.
If you want to become hero, worship Lord Shiva. He will make you hero.
And because he is husband of Durga, you also can get materially very opulent by worshipping Lord Shiva.
And if you worship Ganesha, Lord Ganesha, they are all devotees, pure devotees.
Mother Parvati and Lord Shiva and all others, Brahma.
Ganesha, you want wisdom, you approach Lord Ganesha.
He is also a devotee, but he is department in charge of imparting wisdom.
Saraswati, she will award you learning, speech, eloquency and all these things.
So if you want some particular, you want a very good wife, worship Lord Brahma.
He will give you a very good wife. So these departments are there.
So sacrifice for your whatever results you are producing.
Don't enjoy directly. If you enjoy directly, you are called a miser, kanjus makhichus.
He doesn't know how to enjoy the resources, miser.
So a person who wants to enjoy, Kripana phal hetva.
So Krishna tells to Arjuna, dure nahi avaram karma buddhi yoga dhanan jaya.
Krishna, I am giving you buddhi yoga.
Understand this buddhi yoga and dure nahi avaram karma.
Avaram means abominable.
Labourers thinking whatever house I produce, I will enjoy.
Whatever car I manufacture in assembly line, I will drive it home.
This is very abominable criminal mentality.
So Krishna is telling to Arjuna, first of all, give up this criminal mentality by buddhi yoga.
Bhakti yoga is also called buddhi yoga.
Person who works to enjoy the results of his activities, he is called Kripana.
Kripana means kanjus, miser.
He doesn't know how to enjoy his resources.
Rather than directly enjoying the results of your work, if you enjoy to demigods,
demigods can give you great boons and benedictions.
Thus earlier people would worship the devatas very very nicely.
And they would easily get very very opulent.
And one of the devatas which is favorite of people to get boon very easily is Lord Shiva.
Lord Shiva is also called Ashutosh.
Ashu means soon and Tosh means pleasure.
Very soon Lord Shiva becomes pleased.
Why he becomes pleased very soon?
Because you have seen Lord Shiva is always in meditation, always.
Sometimes Mother Parvati is coming, not disturbed at all.
So Lord Shiva is so much absorbed in meditation.
Brahma is absorbed in meditation.
So Narad Muni when he saw Brahma, Brahma creating the entire universe.
If somebody can produce some little gold and ash, people tell you are God, God, you are so powerful.
Brahma was creating entire universe.
And Narad Muni told Lord Brahma, I was thinking you are the God, original God.
But when I saw you are also doing tapasya and you are meditating,
then I wish to understand who is that person on which you are meditating.
You are not supreme, then you also need to do tapasya and meditation.
God need not do any tapasya and meditation.
Because God is source of all powers.
So upon whom you are meditating, please let me know.
I thought you are only God.
So Brahma told, yes, any person can think I am supreme Lord seeing my powers.
But that is not fact.
Then he spoke Bhagavatam to Narad Muni.
Similarly, Lord Shiva, he is always meditating upon.
It is mentioned in the scriptures.
Lord Sankarshan.
Lord Sankarshan is another form of Lord Krishna, 400 form, which he has expanded for particular purpose,
especially for holding all the planets together.
Modern science call it gravity.
Vedas call it Sankarshan.
By the power of Sankarshan, the planets are there in their place.
So Lord Sankarshan, he is always meditating Lord Shiva upon him.
So just like, you know, sometimes when we are very nicely reading Bhagavatam, when we are chanting very nicely,
we also have some managerial responsibilities.
Some people will come.
Prabhu, can you please sign the voucher?
Can you please do this thing?
Sometimes we don't even see the vouchers very nicely
because you are disturbing in my chanting and reading.
I want to read nicely Bhagavatam.
I want to chant, meditate.
In a similar fashion, Lord Shiva is enjoying ecstasy meditating.
But then some people keep on asking.
So Lord Shiva immediately satisfies their desires.
Okay, take and go.
Don't disturb me.
I am meditating.
So he's called Ashutosh.
So various demons, they approach.
Ravana approached Lord Shiva and Ravana asked, please give me so much power.
And this thing he got from Lord Shiva and he became very, very powerful.
Similarly, Banasur, he approached Lord Shiva.
He got 1000 arms.
I want to have 1000 arms.
And these demons, they don't understand actually what to ask, what not to ask.
So after he got 1000 arms, again, he became frustrated.
Then Shiva told what happened.
So he told, please give me one more boon.
I'm frustrated with my arms.
I do not know what to do with these arms.
I want to fight with some enemies.
I got these arms to defeat enemies.
But as soon as they see my 1000 arms, they run away in fear.
So nobody fights with me.
So what do I do with my 1000 arms?
They are useless.
So I sometimes I start breaking the mountains with my 1000 hands and I'm frustrated what to do.
So please give me another boon.
Okay, what do you want, Lord Shiva asked.
Please give me some person who can fight with me at least.
Then I will feel happy.
I have 1000 arms and I can fight.
Bhasmasur, he got a power.
If you put your hand on somebody's head, his head will crack apart immediately.
And then he wanted to try your Lord Shiva only.
So this is the tendency of the demons.
And there was one such case 500 years ago.
This is a real story, which is recorded in many books, especially in Chaitanya Charita Amrita also.
So one person was very ardent devotee of Lord Shiva.
And he was this Brahmana was smart.
He was intelligent.
So not everyone approaches Lord Shiva for material desires.
Some people approach Lord Shiva for liberation also.
But this Brahmana was very smart.
Other people, when they approach Lord Shiva, they ask for some boon and particular benediction.
Give me this, give me this, give me this.
Lord Shiva being very powerful, he was bestowing these benefits very easily.
But this person, he was smart.
He thought Ramana, such a great devotee, offered his heads to Lord Shiva.
But what is his life? He got killed miserably.
He was not satisfied in his life.
So I will ask the greatest benediction from Shiva.
Give me greatest benediction.
Give me greatest opulence of this world.
So this person started worshipping Lord Shiva very, very nicely.
And then he he was able to please Lord Shiva very nicely.
And Lord Shiva appeared.
Yes, my dear son, I'm very pleased by your service.
Please tell me what do you want in life?
So you told my dear Lord, thank you very much.
You offered his obeisances.
I have just one desire, one demand.
Yes, please tell me what is that?
Please give me the greatest benediction.
Give me the greatest opulence.
I don't want to settle for anything less.
The greatest opulence.
Please give it to me.
So Lord Shiva told, oh, you want the greatest opulence?
Then you have to do something.
Okay, what?
Please tell me.
Greatest opulence you will get.
You have to go to a person, Sanatana Goswami in Vrindavan.
You'll find a saintly person by this name.
You approach him and then he will give you the greatest opulence.
And he became very happy.
Now I'm going to get the greatest opulence, which nobody got,
which Bhasmathur could not get, Banathur could not get, Ramad could not get.
The great stalwart devotees of Lord Shiva could not get.
I am going to, Kubera could not get.
I am going to get that.
More than Kubera, more than anything, greatest opulence.
He became very eager.
Immediately he started marching towards Vrindavan.
And eventually, as per Lord Shiva's direction,
he was able to find that small hut in which Sanatana Goswami was living.
And he went inside, offered his Dhanvas, Maharaj Pranam Dhanvat.
I'm very glad my life is successful because I've had your darshan.
So now, Lord, please tell me why you have come, son, he asked.
Well, actually, Lord Shiva has sent me here.
Lord Shiva, he asked him, give me the greatest opulence.
And he has told me to approach you for that.
So Sanatana Goswami told, what you're talking?
You see, I'm living in this hut here.
A person who is living in hut, what opulence he has and what can he give to others?
So how I can offer you what you're talking?
No, no, no, no.
Lord Shiva cannot be a liar.
He has told me you will give me the greatest opulence.
So please give me that.
So generally people approach saintly people.
Opulence means they want material riches like that.
So Sanatana Goswami told, OK, I will give you go on the other side of my heart there under the leaves.
There's some dustbin.
I throw the dust over there.
It is there beneath that you'll find a small stone.
Bring it a unique stone like that.
He gave the description and he went behind under the leaves in that place.
He actually found that stone, special stone.
He brought it and he gave to Sanatana Goswami.
He told, touch it to some piece of iron.
Touch it to a piece of iron and immediately it became gold.
Oh, it was a touch stone.
Which people had heard.
It is there with some sages.
It is very, very rare.
They eventually realized, oh, there's actually there.
I've got touch stone.
I've got Midas touch now.
Now I'll be the richest person in this world.
Wow, it is actually the greatest opulence.
Ravan also did not have this.
Ravan had to make a tunnel till Brazil, they tell, because he was trying to get the gold and he got so much gold from there.
He had a golden city, Lanka.
He was also not able to produce gold like this.
He had to do a lot of mining to extract gold.
And I've got this opulence.
Oh, this is so nice.
And then he thanked Sanatana Goswami.
Thank you very much.
I've got the greatest opulence.
And then he started coming back.
He was very happy.
But then he was a smart person.
He realized, I think there is something wrong.
This cannot be the greatest opulence.
If this valuable stone, gem of a stone, this person is putting under the dust behind his cottage,
it means he has got something much, much more valuable.
Something valuable a person would not keep like that in the dust under the leaves.
So he has got something more valuable, which he has not given me.
I think he's testing me.
So I should go back and ask him the original opulence, which made him give up this wonderful thing, which nobody would give up.
Keeping the dust like that.
He immediately ran back.
Maharaj, Maharaj.
Yes, what has happened?
Are you not happy?
No, Maharaj, I want to understand.
This kind of opulence you have thrown in the dust behind your cottage.
So this is not the biggest opulence that you have.
Please give me that thing which has made you throw this stone behind your cottage under the leaves.
So Sanatana Goswami told, you want that?
So he told, yes, yes, I want that.
Lord Shiva sent me.
So he told, first of all, you have to throw the stone in the Yamuna.
Go and throw it away.
So immediately went.
He became very happy.
Now something more fantastic is going to come.
He immediately threw it far away in the Yamuna.
And then he came.
Yes, yes, thrown.
Yes, thrown.
So now sit here and chant Hare Krishna.
So then he explained this chanting of Hare Krishna Mahamantra.
Actually, it is the highest opulence a person can have.
So when you sacrifice the hard results of your labor for demigods,
they can give you some results which will be of temporary in nature.
You can become very powerful as long as this body is there.
Next body again, you may be weak.
You can be animal or anything.
So that's Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita.
Bhagavad Gita, 7th chapter.
Those people who have less intelligence rather the exact words used are
whose intelligence is stolen by their material desires.
They worship other devatas.
Why?
Because
These results are temporary and we are eternal.
Living entity is eternal.
So what is the use of settling for something temporary?
Ask something eternal, permanent.
So that is why he tells,
So Krishna is telling those who worship other devatas,
they also part and parcel of Krishna.
So they are worshiping Krishna, but not in a proper way.
Thus, they don't derive the highest result.
The lowest Yajna.
Sacrifice their results for getting some material benefits.
Higher people, they do Gyan Yajna.
Gyan Yajna is also sacrifice.
You sacrifice your time and energy in order to get knowledge.
Similarly, this entire varnashrama system is sacrifice.
Brahmacharya is also sacrifice.
A person sacrifices the sensual enjoyment, sense gratification.
Enjoyment of senses is very very nice.
Especially sexual enjoyment and Brahmacharya sacrifices that.
For self realization.
So Brahmacharya is also a Yajna.
Then Vivaha Yajna.
Married life is also a Yajna.
A person sacrifices his tendency for unrestricted sense enjoyment.
By accepting the responsibility of one life partner.
So this is also sacrifice.
A person is sacrificing.
So similarly, everywhere there is sacrifice recommended in a person's life.
Human life is meant only so that a person can sacrifice.
In 12th chapter Krishna tells the highest thing is
Always think about me 24 hours.
You've been absorbed in my service.
That is the highest bliss ecstasy a person can enjoy.
If you cannot without deviation, think of me.
You do Abhyas. You practice Bhakti Yoga.
Then that is second level.
Then Krishna tells
If you are not able to do Abhyas Yoga.
You are not able to practice the rules and regulations of Sadhana.
Which we have been discussing over these days.
You cannot perform Sadhana also nicely.
Then what do you do?
Then you do work for me.
Now if you cannot work even for me.
Then what you can do?
Then Krishna tells wherever you are working offer the results to me.
That also Krishna I cannot offer the results also.
Krishna is so merciful.
Cannot do this, do this.
Cannot do this, do this.
But the bottom most level Krishna tells is
Simply by sacrificing the result of your activities.
You will get Shanti Anantaram.
You will get uninterrupted peace.
So simply sacrifice.
This is the basic level.
If a person does not have knowledge.
That I should sacrifice the results for Krishna.
Do general charity.
Just like many people.
This is Corona now.
So people are helping other people with shelter.
This is good work.
Spending their money.
People are spending their money so that people can be fed very nicely.
This is good work.
But this is not the real work.
Because ultimately Krishna is taking care.
They are becoming instrument.
Without Krishna desire you cannot feed anyone.
Without Krishna sanction you cannot make somebody starve.
But nevertheless they are developing a good heart.
I don't want to enjoy anything.
This thief mentality is reducing.
But then among all the sacrifices.
Which is best sacrifice.
That Krishna will describe in the 10th chapter.
We will see.
Sometime Krishna tells.
I have recommended various Yajna as Krishna.
You might be getting confused in Bhagavad Gita.
So please listen now.
Yajna Naam of all the Yajnas.
Japa Yajna Asmi.
I am Japa Yajna.
The top most Yajna is Japa Yajna.
What we do every day.
So that is what Sanatan Goswami told.
This is the greatest opulence.
Chanting the holy names of Lord.
Meera bhai also told the same thing.
Payo ji maine naam ratan dhan payo.
I have got this wonderful jewel.
Of chanting the holy name.
So now actually the chanting that we do.
It is not chanting.
We have not been gifted with the holy name.
Holy name is completely spiritual.
Nitya mukto poona shuddho binatvam naam namino.
Naam chintamani krishna chaitanya rasa vigraha.
This name of Krishna is completely conscious.
Like Krishna.
It is incarnation of Krishna.
And it is the source of all the pleasures for the living entity.
It is completely spiritual.
Now what we do is cheto darpana marjanam.
We are just touching the external covering of this Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
We are not chanting pure name.
We are doing offensive chanting now.
So by chanting, chanting, chanting.
Following the rules and regulations very nicely.
Understanding this fact and preaching this knowledge to others.
Explaining this knowledge to others.
Srila Prabhupada tells.
Unless somebody becomes an expert preacher.
He cannot chant pure name of Krishna.
So by leading a very pure life.
Improving our purity.
Especially by preaching this knowledge.
Spreading this knowledge to others.
A person can actually chant the name of Krishna purely.
And when a person chants this name of Krishna very, very nicely.
Immediately he is completely satisfied and so full.
That he does not need anything else in life.
And we can understand from common sense also.
Just like our founder of Amazon.
So rich.
The most rich person of the world.
But recently sacrificed 50% of his income.
Isn't it? For what?
For getting love in life.
Isn't it?
He can sacrifice billions of dollars.
Just to get love in life.
Isn't it?
So it is the love.
Which is the greatest opulence that a person wants in life.
Nothing else.
Money you cannot eat.
Money will not satisfy you.
Other name, fame, position also will not satisfy you.
Founder of Tesla.
He is telling.
I feel very miserable.
When I go to my bed alone at night.
I don't have any partner with them.
I don't have any partner with me.
I feel very bad.
So when there is no love in life.
Entire opulence, name, fame.
Everything is sheer wastage of human life.
And love is not possible here.
Because we discussed yesterday.
Every person in this world is envious.
Satisfy me.
Then I will satisfy you.
You scratch my back.
I scratch your back.
So love is possible only with Krishna.
And when a person loves Krishna.
He loves all the living entities here.
So thus.
That stage of love of Godhead.
A person can very easily have.
By chanting and hearing the names of Krishna.
Very, very nicely.
So this pure name of Krishna.
This Hare Krishna Mahamantra.
It is the greatest opulence.
So by doing this sadhana.
This hearing of Bhagavad Gita every day.
Following four regular day principles.
Chanting Hare Krishna always.
Especially sixteen rounds.
We are aspiring for the day.
When Krishna will bless us with the shuddha naam.
When we will be able to chant the pure name of Krishna.
Then immediately our life is completely full.
A person does not need anything.
So this is the greatest opulence that a person can achieve in life.
So thus.
In order to attain the greatest opulence.
You need not do karmakanda yajna.
You need not do jnana yajna.
Simply sacrifice for Krishna.
Whatever strength you have.
Intelligence you have.
The capacity to talk you have.
Or resources you have.
Praner, arther, dhiyavacha.
Use everything in the service of Krishna.
That is why when we do kirtan in the temple.
We jump very nicely.
And with all energy.
So when we had our new.
Those of you who have seen Iskcon Bangalore.
That is the temple Krishna has given.
So when Iskcon was a new temple.
And all the reporters would come to see.
And they would see devotees jumping very high in the temple.
And very high.
And for minutes and hours they are jumping.
So they could not figure out what has happened.
Nobody can jump like that for a long time.
In disco also you can all dance like that.
So they published a report.
So these people they take drugs.
These Hare Krishna devotees.
And then they dance very nicely in their temple.
Because they could not figure out.
Anyone who is not on drugs can keep on jumping so high.
So why we jump so high?
Devotees feel ecstasy. Yes.
And they want to sacrifice all the energy that they have got.
In the service of Krishna.
Similarly when we do japa yajna.
All the attention that we have got.
We sacrifice for Krishna.
In the service of Krishna.
So thus this is the most important learning in life.
From where our spiritual life or even material life begins.
We want spiritual comfort.
Or even material comfort.
Sacrifice yajna is very very important.
So please do not think.
I am entitled to enjoy everything that I am producing.
If we don't do yajna from our duties.
Immediately we come under birth, death and so many miseries.
From which we are suffering from.
So human life is meant for sacrifice.
Highest sacrifice is for Krishna.
When we do that we get the greatest opulence of life.
That is love of Krishna.
The pure name of Krishna.
So if you want to worship other demigods.
Other devatas.
Please ask them like this.
Brahmana ask.
Give me the greatest opulence.
I don't want to settle for anything less than that.
Give me the greatest benediction.
Greatest opulence.
And then Lord Shiva will guide you.
Goddess Durga will guide you.
Lord Ganesha will guide you.
Everyone will guide you towards perfect knowledge and perfection of life.
That is complete surrenderence to Krishna.
With this I would like to end.
Any questions?
So our session we finish here.
Sorry I took 10 minutes more today.
Those who want to carry on they can kindly carry on.
But I will be online for 20 more minutes to answer the questions if devotees have.
Then why don't scientists read the Vedas for their research?
Please explain Prabhuji.
So Anshul has asked a very nice question.
That if Vedas are so nice scientific.
Why scientists do not read Vedas for their research?
Please explain.
So this is also a brainwashed civilization.
How it is brainwashed civilization?
Please wait for 30 seconds.
I will share the screen with you.
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama
Okay I am sharing the screen now.
Please read these few quotes very carefully.
Especially Anshul who has asked the question.
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna
Please read the quote of Voltaire.
The most famous French philosopher who spoke common sense is not so common.
You are able to read this?
Yes.
I am convinced that everything has come down to us from the banks of the Ganga.
Astronomy, astrology, spiritualism etc.
So Voltaire is telling who is a French person.
We are so fond of nationalism.
We say our country is supreme.
Everything has come from us.
But he is admitting France is not the top power in knowledge or whatever.
Everything he is telling I am convinced Voltaire is convinced in 16th century or 17th century.
I am convinced that everything has come down to us from the banks of the Ganga.
Astronomy, astrology, spiritualism etc.
It is very important to note that some 2500 years ago at least Pythagoras went from Samos to Ganga to learn geometry.
But he would certainly not have undertaken such a strained journey had the reputation of the Brahmin science not been long established in Europe.
Schrodinger
What all revolutions of technology we have today it is because of quantum physics.
Yes.
And these are the founders.
So now I will be quoting the three founders of quantum mechanics.
Whose theories were considered foolish when they proposed them to the classical physicists.
So Schrodinger he has told the unity and continuity of Vedanta reflected in the unity and continuity of wave mechanics.
So Schrodinger had read Vedanta very very nicely.
Alfred North Whitehead British mathematician says the vastest knowledge of today cannot transcend the Buddha of Rishis in ancient Indian science in its most advanced stage now is closer to Vedanta than ever before.
Britishers captured our country on the plea that you are foolish people.
We are teaching you how to live.
You do not know civilized life.
So why would a Britisher who has no connection with the Indian culture?
Why would a Britisher praise a country who was subjugated who was considered inferior?
And he's telling the vastest knowledge today cannot cross transcend the Buddha of Rishis of India.
He's telling and science in its most advanced stage now is closer to Vedanta.
Now it is trying to come closer to Vedanta bridging the gap.
Vedanta is much much more advanced than the modern discovery of science.
Henry David Thoreau says in the morning I bathe my intellect in the Cosmogony philosophy of Bhagavad Gita in comparison with which our modern literature seems purely American.
America is a top most country and he is he belonged to Harvard School of Divinity.
They study him very very nicely.
And Henry David Thoreau is telling every day I read Bhagavad Gita in comparison to which modern literature seems insignificant, very puny.
So some more quotes I think I'm missing here.
So even you can search on the Internet.
Niels Bohr, who gave us all the electronic structure and everything, he tells I go into the Upanishads to ask questions.
Nikola Tesla is telling similar thing about prana, ether, akash and everything.
So all the great scientists, Oppenheimer, who tested the first atomic bomb, he's quoting Bhagavad Gita shloka from 10th chapter.
So all these people, Otto Oppenheimer, these people, Walter, not Whitehead, Thoreau, Niels Bohr, Schrodinger, Tesla, who is considered as smart as Albert Einstein, even Albert Einstein, he was reading Bhagavad Gita.
So unfortunately today, Tamsic scientists, foolish people, they tell that this thing.
Otherwise, all these original scientists who are doing fundamental research, scientists means fundamental research, not technology for sense enjoyment.
They were all great readers of Vedanta in the Vedas.
I hope it answers the question.
Hare Krishna Prabhu, how can we save ourselves in this country where one used to disrespect other of different religion?
And I'm also got tired of the working style of the current government.
If the current government, they spoil the economy of our country, would Krishna save us?
And when he would save us?
Very nice question.
So, yes, it is very, very unfortunate that people are disrespecting other religions rather than subscribing to common things.
People are trying to find the differences.
Chanting the names of God is common thread and the fundamental principle of all the religions, whether it be Christianity, they chant hallelujah, Christ, the names of God on Rosary,
whether it be Muslims, they chant on Tasbih, the names of God, whether it be Sikhism, they also chant on beads made of wool.
Everyone chants the name of God on beads, on beads especially.
So chanting the name of God is common in all the bona fide religion.
This is what Prabhupada told.
This is what Chaitanya Mahaprabhu told, who is God Krishna himself.
He told you are hesitant to chant the name of Krishna.
You think it is Hindu God, although Krishna does not declare like that.
You can chant the name of God as per your religion, but it should be name of God.
But simply we want that you chant the name of God attentively and develop love for God.
This is what Prabhupada told very, very nicely.
So that is why we also teach that we invite everyone, Hindu, Muslims, Buddhists, Sikhs, everyone, because we are this body and soul, the same complex system everyone has.
So the laws apply equally to everyone.
So chanting the names of God is common principle for everyone.
You don't want to chant the name of Krishna, it doesn't matter.
You chant Allah, you chant Christ, you chant Jehovah, you are Jew, it does not matter.
But chant.
Why we are chanting the names of Krishna?
Because we come in display succession Guru Parampara of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.
And the mantra becomes effective when it is received from the Guru Parampara.
So this is a proper understanding.
Government has spoiled the economy of country.
Will Krishna save us when he would save us?
So Krishna would save us when we completely surrender unto him.
The government is willing to save the obedient citizens.
And government punishes to rectify the disobedient citizens.
As soon as we completely surrender to Krishna, immediately Krishna will save us that moment itself.
Otherwise, a bad government will be put into place and people would be made to suffer.
Hare Krishna Prabhuji, when Daksh Prajapati was offered, offering to Lord Vishnu during as a part of Yajna, the offerings went to Lord Shiva.
This was as per the story of Mata Sati's death.
Is it correct?
If yes, then how everything offered to any demigod is offered to Lord Krishna?
No, if you read that story nicely, all the offerings would go to actually Lord Vishnu.
And Lord Shiva's portion was not given to Lord Shiva.
That is why Mother Sati became very agitated.
You have invited all the devatas, but you have not invited my husband Lord Shiva.
Prabhuji, in DD National, we saw that Lord Ram lifted Shiv Dhanush.
Parshuram came and shouted because Dhanush was broken.
And he asked Lord Ram to prove himself.
So Lord Ram showed him that even he is also Supreme Personality of Godhead.
So my question is that why Lord Vishnu wasn't able to understand himself?
It was like, Vishnu as Vishnu, please clear this doubt.
So this needs a little different understanding.
And first of all, don't watch DD National or any national or international channel for understanding spiritual life.
They will misguide us.
So it is told in the Vedas that milk is very good.
But milk has definitely many, many nutrients.
But if it is touched by the lips of a snake, it becomes poisonous.
You cannot tell, Prabhuji, there is only one drop of poison.
The rest is carbohydrate protein.
So let me drink the milk.
Let me drink the milk.
No, that one drop of poison spoils all the good nutrients of a milk.
Similarly, it is told,
A person who is avaishnava, who is not a devotee of Krishna, don't listen from him.
Because Krishna tells, only a devotee can know me.
Non-devotee will simply misinterpret the text.
So many things will be correct in these TV serials also and otherwise also.
But one small misunderstanding can spoil the entire spiritual life.
So please get the knowledge from the perfect parampara.
Don't resort to these things.
So you can personally ask me. I will answer you in person.
When the time of Shri Shankaracharya, he said the teaching of Aham Brahmasmi,
this is partially right, but not the ultimate truth.
He made a number of disciples.
Why at that time Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did not appear to correct him?
Because that was required at that point of time.
From atheism, people were supposed to raise themselves,
rise to the platform of surrender to God and love of God.
It is not possible immediately.
So that philosophy, at that time it was required.
Thus Lord Shiva in the incarnation of Shankaracharya was given the task.
In this 21st century, how we can tackle the present caste system in India?
Situation is worst in western UP, Bihar, Rajasthan, MP.
Is there any solution? Please show the light, Prabhu.
By educating people, there is no other way.
We have to spread this. That is why I request all of you to read Bhagavad Gita very nicely
and to spread this knowledge to as many people as possible.
By knowledge, by ignorance, this caste system has come.
Krishna does not recommend caste system.
It can go away by disseminating proper knowledge.
And even if they are not able to understand knowledge,
simply chant Hare Krishna Mantra, do Kirtan and distribute Krishna Prasadam.
Automatically, heart will become purified and they will understand the right thing.
And even if it is not happening, don't worry. Just stay put.
Our Reliance Jio is reaching everywhere.
People will come across all the western media, get completely spoiled and never follow caste system.
Forget whatever little things they are following of caste also.
So anyway, media is going to spoil everything. Don't worry.
Hare Krishna Prabhuji, why we don't find Brahmaji temple commonly here?
Brahmaji is very high grade Guru and also first creation from whom we are emerging.
Although I have not heard from Srila Prabhupada,
but people tell that Lord Brahma got cursed that he will not have any temple of his own.
But we have one in Pushkar and maybe one more in some other place.
But I have not heard from Prabhupada.
So unless I have not heard from my spiritual master, it is not good to transfer that knowledge.
Hare Krishna Prabhu, if I think God take into installation new version update of this world with the help of COVID-19,
as we update our mobile version in our mobile, is it correct? No.
That updation will happen after Kalpa.
Krishna will burn all the planets and then put them into water and then take out and then new species would be installed.
Now it is not. It is just little.
Krishna is killing the virus like living entities using a small virus.
Hare Krishna Prabhu, please explain how married life is a sacrifice in detail.
In detail, now we don't have time. So maybe some other time we can discuss.
In short, you can understand if you don't marry, you will have unlimited sexual enjoyment.
So you sacrifice that tendency by accepting responsibility of one life partner.
So it is sacrifice.
If you are eternal transcendental, how can anything eternal transcendental have a source?
Since it was never created nor destroyed.
So why do we say Krishna is source of everything?
So nice question. If everything is transcendental, how it can have a source?
So we tell Krishna is source, Srila Prabhupada explains.
Just to explain that we are dependent upon Krishna, not that one day we came out of Krishna.
Just like the sunlight is the source of sun.
But there is never a day when only sun is there, dark sun.
Or there is never a day only light is there without sun.
But the source of sunlight is sun.
In a similar fashion, just like the sun and sunlight always exist in parallel.
God and the living entities always exist in parallel.
But the living entities are dependent upon Krishna.
In that way, Krishna is the source, eternal source.
Eternally we are dependent upon Krishna.
Hi Guruji, can we pray to get material benefits rather than praying other Gods?
Yes, so it is not good to ask material benefit because we do not know what is good for us.
But still it is told in the Vedas, if at all you have any material desires also,
Ti vrena bhakti yogena ya jeta purusha param.
Worship the Supreme Personality of God with intense bhakti yoga.
However, the proper understanding, intelligent person will not ask anything from Krishna because he is our father.
He knows what is best for us.
If lockdown extends, will we have such live Gita classes?
We will continue. It is a very nice platform.
We have realized many people can come across this thing.
So we will continue with the sessions, if not every day, on a periodical basis.
I wish HKM will find an opportunity to explain Vishnu Sastra Naam over a few Sundays.
Vishnu Sastra Naam, I will speak about it. Yes, definitely sometime.
We are not eternal. Our soul is eternal.
There is nothing called our soul.
We are soul and we are eternal, living within this body which is temporary.
Our soul is nothing. We are souls. We are eternal.
Hare Krishna Prabhu, today's lecture was very, very valuable and important.
Can you please send me any kind of possible recording of today's lecture?
Please, Prabhuji. Yes, I will share after our module is over, after April 14th.
Hare Krishna, you told you will explain what is minimalistic life in true sense.
So I covered a portion of it that human life is meant for minimalistic living.
If you so one kind of minimalistic living is that let me live just a very simple life and don't produce any result only.
So this kind of minimalistic life, it is a hindrance for spiritual advancement.
Although it is good for the general mass of people, eventually they will be able to focus on Krishna.
But at max they can make their own life, their own self spiritually advanced.
But actually those people who want to become advanced spiritualists, Krishna tells they have to work very, very hard.
Prabhupada tells you have to work harder than materialist also.
But you have to work hard so that the result of all your work you can sacrifice for Krishna.
So human life is meant for minimalistic living just so that body and soul can be kept together.
Every single penny which is not required for keeping body and soul together, we should learn and we should teach others to offer that to Krishna.
Because that one penny will not give you so much enjoyment if you enjoy directly.
Then what it will bring you when you offer it to Krishna.
So this is the purpose of this is the idea behind minimalistic life.
Work very hard, become as rich as you want, but just keep your body and soul together and offer all the riches to Krishna.
In that way you will get the greatest opulence.
Student can sacrifice. Now what does a student have in life?
Student has some time. That time he can use to do japa yajna.
Japa yajna is also a sacrifice.
So sacrifice does not always mean sacrificing some materials or money.
Dravya yajna is called sacrifice of materials.
Swadhyaya yajna is another yajna.
When you study, that is also sacrifice.
The same time you would have used for playing football or watching cricket or sense gratification.
But you use that time to serve Krishna, to do deity worship, to chant Krishna's name and to preach this knowledge to others.
You do book distribution, distribute Bhagavad Gita to others.
In this way a student can do sacrifice.
You can sacrifice your speech.
You have capacity of talking.
You can tell.
You can tell.
We are not the body, we are eternal.
You preach, you sacrifice your power of speaking.
In this way whatever energy you have, you don't have money as of now.
Apart from money, whatever energy skills you have, you use that for Krishna.
That is also called sacrifice.
And when you get marks, you work very hard with the intention that
when I get good marks, then people will think, oh this person chants nicely, so he is getting good marks.
Let me also chant.
Then your study also becomes yajna.
So like this a student can do yajna.
I have not heard the answer from Prabhupada directly, but Prabhupada does mention
Atharva Veda is the original Veda and other three Vedas are coming out of Atharva Veda.
So maybe they cover the knowledge of Atharva.
I am not sure.
This could be the reason.
Please keep on continuing these types of lectures even after lockdown.
Yes, we will definitely try to.
Does pure name differ in sound in comparison to what we chant?
It will be revealed with spiritual advancement.
The effect is very different.
A person, we will realize when we advance.
Chanting pure name of Krishna is not possible.
After great spiritual advancement, a person is able to do that.
So all these things will be revealed.
This question is just like if somebody is asking sick person.
Let us understand.
He has always been sick.
If he asks, what is the taste of rasgulla?
Is it bitter like I am having now getting the taste?
How can you explain what is the real taste of rasgulla?
He has to eat it.
When a person is sick, you can tell him, yes, the real taste is different, but he has to eat.
So when we chant, we will understand.
Can we have a recording of today's class?
Yes, after April 14, we will give.
How can we improve quality of chanting?
I will discuss this very soon as a devotee of.
Oh, I'm sorry.
It is time up.
So we will take more questions.
Please keep on chanting very, very nicely.
Chanting is important.
And those again, I repeat, you need not every time register yourself.
When you register, you get a mail in that mail.
One link is given.
Simply click on the link and you will join the session directly.
Only first time we need to register.
And I have got the complaint that some people are sending personal messages to some Mataji.
So that is not good.
Please try to avoid all these things mundane people do outside.
Otherwise, I have to expel you from the group and take disciplinary action.
So please do not do all these things.
Put any questions if you have to me.
Don't engage in other activities.
So please try to connect more people.
Whatever you hear, try to speak to others.
So take good advantage of lockdown.
Everyone can hear.
This is a wonderful platform.
We'll discuss more tomorrow.
Thank you so much.
Hare Krishna.
I'm sorry.
I forgot chanting today.
Please chant on your own now only.
Otherwise, you'll forget.
So please close the session.
Do finish one round of chanting and then continue.
Hari Bhol.
