So we have been discussing in the last few classes, we understood from the beginning in this chapter 9 chapter, which is called the most confidential knowledge, the knowledge of pure devotional service unto Krishna.
Knowledge of Krishna is confidential, but there are various classes of devotees.
Most of the people who are devotees, which itself is a very high position, they are motivated devotees.
I am a devotee because I want this thing. I am a devotee because I want that thing.
Sometimes there is complaint, I am devotee why this thing is happening in my life.
But pure devotional service is very very rare and difficult to attain, difficult to understand.
In which the mood of person is not to get anything from Krishna, but to offer everything to Krishna.
This is most confidential knowledge and this is explained in this chapter of Bhagavad Gita.
So let us see today's verse, the last verse of this chapter.
The last verse of every chapter is very important because that is the essence.
Every last verse of the chapter is very very powerful.
All the verses, every word is actually very important, but specially in the last verse, Krishna gives the essence of all the instructions of that chapter.
So what is the essence of all the instructions of this most confidential knowledge?
And this knowledge is so important that Krishna has repeated this verse again.
So this verse has been repeated twice in Bhagavad Gita.
So time was very less on the battlefield of Kurukshetra.
In hardly 40-45 minutes or maximum one hour, Arjun was able to understand, he was able to hear Bhagavad Gita.
And Krishna has to cover entirety of knowledge.
Krishna is telling, I am explaining all the knowledge in principle here in Bhagavad Gita.
If you understand this,
nothing further remains to be known.
So now Krishna has to explain everything.
Krishna starts explaining from analytical understanding of body and soul, Sankhya.
How we are not this body, how we are different from this body.
Satisfaction of body is not my satisfaction, mind, intelligence, everything Krishna has explained in second chapter.
Krishna explains the position of a person who has attained the perfection.
And then Krishna explains Karma Yoga, which is the first step of spiritual life.
Not getting attached to the results of your activity, acting without attachment.
Then he explains Gyan.
If a person is following Karma Yoga nicely, he will come to the level of knowledge.
And then he will get knowledge of Krishna Consciousness.
He will work for the satisfaction of Krishna.
So Krishna explains all these things nicely.
Then he explains Sankhya Yoga, Ashtanga Yoga, and Arjuna rejects everything.
So after following this, a person will come to the level of following.
He will be able to meditate upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
So as long as the mind is disturbed by various desires, it is not possible to have any understanding of God.
So if a person starts renouncing the results of his activities, mind becomes peaceful.
Then sanity develops in the mind.
Then a person is able to cultivate knowledge.
By cultivating knowledge, person understands God is there in my heart.
And then he goes for Ashtanga Yoga, Dhyana Yoga practice.
He starts meditating upon the God who is situated within his heart.
And then after a very, very long time, thousands of years of practice of this Ashtanga Yoga, Hatha Yoga,
a person is able to fix his mind upon Krishna.
So it is a very, very difficult process.
And Arjuna rejected this process, that it is not possible for me to perform.
It is very, very difficult to control the mind.
So sitting at one place and pulling back mind from all other activities
and focusing mind upon your form in the heart, it is very tough.
It is not possible for me, Krishna.
So Krishna tells to Arjuna, do not worry.
That is again the last shloka of the sixth chapter, where the principles of Ashtanga Yoga are explained.
So Krishna explains to Arjuna,
Of all the yogis, there are various yogis as we have discussed.
Karma Yogi, Gnana Yogi, Dhyana Yogi, what Krishna just explained.
So of all the yogis,
A person with great faith who engages in my service, Krishna explains,
He is considered best yogi according to me.
So this Krishna has explained who is the topmost yogi.
So it is not that a person can follow any path.
So all these paths, ultimately, yes, Karma Yoga, Gnana Yoga, Dhyana Yoga.
Krishna tells, foolish is a person who thinks that this Sankhya Yoga is different
and Karma Yoga is different, surrendering to Krishna, Bhakti Yoga, Buddhi Yoga, it is different.
So one who considers Buddhi Yoga and this process of acquiring knowledge, Sankhya, they are different.
That person is unintelligent.
So after understanding, by following Gnana Yoga very, very nicely,
a person understands that Krishna is the source of the entire world.
And then he goes to the next level.
So it is part of the same ladder.
It is not that there are different, different things.
So this yoga is called Yoga Ladder, which Krishna explains in the 12th chapter.
So there are various rungs of this ladder, various steps of this staircase.
It starts with Karma Yoga, Gnana Yoga, Dhyana Yoga and then Bhakti Yoga, finally.
And then in Bhakti Yoga also, the topmost is knowledge of pure devotional service,
engaging in the service of Krishna without expecting anything in return.
So this knowledge is called the most confidential knowledge, the most secret knowledge.
And Krishna repeats this twice.
Now in this chapter, the title is most confidential knowledge.
And at the end, in the 18th chapter, when Krishna is summarizing all the instructions of Bhagavad Gita,
again, Krishna repeats, now I'm going to use...
Now here, my most confidential knowledge, topmost knowledge, which I'm going to give to you.
And what is that knowledge which Krishna spoke at the end of Bhagavad Gita and now also?
So let us try to read this very, very important verse.
So I'll share the screen, show you directly Bhagavad Gita.
So this is what Krishna explains.
Man-mana, means always think of me.
Bhava mad bhakto, means become my devotee.
Mad yaji, worship me.
Maam namaskuru, offer your respects, obeisances unto me.
Maam eva eshyasi, definitely, certainly you will come to me.
Maam eva eshyasi yukpa evam atmanam parayanah.
Engage your mind always in thinking of me.
Offer obeisances and worship me.
Maam eva eshyasi yukpa evam, in this way, a person who is absorbed in me.
Maam eva eshyasi, surely you will come to me.
Maam eva, definitely, certainly you will come to me.
Yukpa evam, who is always absorbed in me.
Yukta means who is always absorbed in Krishna, in which way?
Man-mana, always thinking of Krishna.
Bhava mad bhakto, become my devotee.
What is becoming devotee of Krishna?
Bhava mad bhakto, so the word bhakti has come from bhaj dhatu.
Bhaj dhatu means to render service.
So service can be rendered in many ways.
And there are nine prime ways of rendering pure devotional service to Krishna.
They are shravanam, kirtanam, vishnu, hosmranam, paadu, sevanam, archanam, vandanam, dasyam, sakhyam, atmanivedanam.
It starts with shravanam.
Shravanam means hearing about Krishna.
And then kirtanam, chanting about Krishna.
And when a person is hearing and chanting very very nicely,
just like many people ask that,
Prabhu, you are teaching us meditation.
You are teaching us chanting. Please teach us meditation also.
So actually this only is meditation.
If a person chants and hears very very nicely,
focusing on each and every word discreetly,
understanding, having knowledge that this is non-different from Krishna.
So in this way when a person with great respect,
with great care, without committing offenses,
he chants and hears attentively,
automatically he'll be able to remember the form of Krishna.
Automatically Krishna's pastimes will manifest in the heart,
his instructions and all these things connected to Krishna will be revealed in our heart.
So automatically a person reaches the stage of meditation.
So if by chanting and hearing a person is not able to absorb himself,
then it means we need to still make the process more perfect.
So this is meditation.
We have to chant and hear not just with informality,
but with great attention.
If you are inattentive, then that is also an offense.
However, it does not mean because I am doing offensive chanting,
let me leave it.
By doing shravanam kirtanam very very nicely,
even though it is offensive, keep on doing it.
Slowly we will learn how to practice it
and do it with very very effective attention.
So that is what has to be done.
So Krishna is telling of all the yogas,
of all the instructions that I have given in Bhagavad Gita,
this is the most confidential, most secret instruction.
But why then this instruction is not given to others?
This is very simple thing.
Man-mana, just think of Krishna.
We are thinking of so many things.
If you simply think of Krishna, where is the difficulty?
Anybody can think of Krishna.
Just have a picture of Krishna in front of you
and try to remember that in your heart always.
These are very simple things.
Anybody can do that.
Madhya Ji worshipping Krishna,
Maam Namaskuru offering your respects when you go to the temple.
Very very simple.
Anybody can do that.
But why these instructions are not given?
Why other people are not able to understand?
So thus it is very very important.
Somebody asked Prabhupada,
Prabhupada, which is the most important shloka of Bhagavad Gita?
So Prabhupada told every word is important.
Right from the first word that we have read,
till the last word, every word is very very important and completely transcendental.
So every word carries a great meaning in Bhagavad Gita.
So here it is being told confidential and secret.
So what is the meaning of this confidential?
Confidential means top most classified document.
Everyone will not have access to such a thing that is called confidential.
Confidential documents.
You are not supposed to leak it.
And this document you find everywhere.
Online you can read, offline you can read.
In all of our temples you have cartons and cartons of these confidential instructions.
So what kind of confidential thing is this when it has been leaked to everyone?
Anybody can read this and get the instruction.
Why Krishna is telling it is secret, it is secret.
What kind of secret is this?
So similarly in Vedas you will find many times spiritual master is telling,
now I am going to tell you a very confidential thing.
Just like it happened with the case of Dhruv Maharaj also.
Dhruv Maharaj, he was willing to see God Vishnu immediately.
I want to see.
Because he wanted a kingdom bigger than his grandfather Brahma also.
Brahma is the grandfather of Dhruv Maharaj.
So when he became very very eager, sometimes people ask question,
how can I know who is perfect spiritual master?
And because there are so many people just like my friend contacted me couple of days ago.
And he told I have come across some very famous guru or gurus.
And they are telling this is Dvaparyoga or Treta Yoga going on.
Kalyuga spans for 1000 or 1200 years.
And then Kalyuga had finished long ago.
Now this is Dvaparyoga or Treta Yoga going on.
And reverse cycle happens.
After Kalyuga again Treta Yoga comes.
Then Dvaparyoga something happens.
But I was understanding that after Kalyuga, Satyuga comes.
And then this goes on in cycle and Kalyuga is very very long having lakhs of years.
And then Kalki Avatar will come at the end.
And then he will start new Satyuga.
I told yes what you understood that is correct.
But then he's very famous person.
He's preaching everyone that Kalyuga is finished.
We are living in Dvaparyuga or some other yoga.
So how to understand this?
A lot of confusion is there.
So like this people get confused.
They ask questions that so many people, so many opinions.
So as I told the other day also when I was on that discussion panel,
the other Mataji from a spiritual organization,
she is the leader there and she had come and she's telling that soul lives here in between the eyebrows.
And I was explaining the soul lives in the heart.
And then people audience got confused that probably you are telling soul lives in the heart.
And just see she's telling Mataji is telling soul lives here.
So how do we understand this poor people?
And, you know, sometimes people want to put up questions and this thing just to sometimes people want to become center of attraction.
Krishna should be center of attraction.
But in this material world, we all want to be center of attraction.
I want to wear very nice dress, have nice style, attract people towards myself.
So actually it is not good if a person gets attracted with us.
What benefit will happen to that person?
And because we attracted that person, now that person could not get attracted to Krishna.
So those devotees have a very, very simple life, simple living and high thinking.
Devotees never want to become center of attraction.
Devotee never wants to be famous.
Devotee never wants to be in limelight.
But devotee always wants to put Krishna in center.
So this person asked that Prabhuji, a lot of confusion is happening.
And then I went to this other temple.
They are telling you chant mantra.
And now I have come here, you are telling us please chant Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna first and Hare Ram, Hare Ram after that in the second line.
So I am very much confused.
What poor people like us will do?
So I asked him, so which mantra you are chanting?
Hare Ram one first or Hare Krishna first?
He told nothing.
I told that is why you are confused.
So what is the difference?
Chant something, no?
You are chanting so many things.
You are calling Ramu, you are calling Suresh, Ramesh, all your friends or your family members.
You call so many names in a day.
Now what harm will happen if you chant any mantra?
Chant some name of God, no?
And then clarity will come.
So because we are not sincere, we are not guided to a genuine spiritual master.
If a person develops sincerity of the heart, then he will be guided to a genuine spiritual master.
Then he will be guided to a genuine spiritual master.
So when people get confused that who is right, who is wrong, we have to ask ourselves,
are we really very, very sincere to find out what is truth of this world?
Who am I?
I want to know I am body or I am soul.
Who is God?
So have I?
Do I want to do research?
Who is God?
Who is the original creator?
Why he has created this world?
What is the purpose behind this?
Have I ever inquired about this?
If there is no inquiry, then why I will be guided to a right master?
I will never be guided.
So if I am very, very eager to know what is truth, what is correct,
so many theories, so many people and understanding truth is important
because if I follow truth, then only I can be happy.
So if there's so much inquisitiveness is there, somehow I want to know,
then we will be guided.
Otherwise, we will be misguided.
It is very important to me.
So because Dhruv Maharaj was very, very eager,
somehow or the other, I want to see God immediately,
then immediately Krishnashtan Narad Muni to Dhruv Maharaj.
So when we are very, very eager to follow spiritual life nicely,
I want to understand what is correct.
I am sincere in my heart.
I will be guided.
And then Narad Muni, after testing him, there would be tests also.
After testing, Narad Muni told him,
now I'm going to give you a very secret mantra, a very confidential mantra.
And then he gave him,
He told by chanting this, very soon you will see God.
And when Dhruv Maharaj chanted this mantra in a week,
he started seeing Khe Charas.
Khe means sky, chara means who fly or roam in the sky.
There are many living entities who fly in the sky without any other devices.
So normally with ordinary vision, we cannot see these things.
So just like the Vedas tell moon is full of living entities,
moon planet or every planet is full of living entities
and various other descriptions.
And they tell, no, no, people have gone.
We have put satellites.
We are not able to see.
Sir, why you are thinking everything which exists, you should be able to see it.
Even ghosts you are not able to see.
What to speak of ghosts?
You cannot see even yourself within this body.
So what to speak of going to another planet and finding out somebody.
So they are very advanced living entities.
They may not be visible unless they agree to our gross vision.
So what is the use of your research work?
Just like a sick man doing research in on the taste of food or a blind man doing research,
which is the most beautiful painting.
How can a blind man figure out what is a painting?
So in a similar fashion, we are blind to most of the reality.
So because of this power of secret mantra in one week by sincere chanting,
he was able to see even the things which are invisible to general people.
And then in six months he was able to see God face to face.
So Prabhupada mentions why this thing is called confidential.
Why this is secret?
In Bhagavatam it is mentioned.
Lacks of copies are there in the world.
People can read it.
So then it is explained.
It is confidential because unless it is received in Guru parampara from a bona fide spiritual master,
as we discussed yesterday and before that,
sam praday viheenaye mantra te nish phala mataha
If you take any mantra and try to chant it,
unless it is coming from a proper guru shishya parampara,
which is starting from God,
that mantra will be nish phala.
That would be useless and useless.
We discussed in the sense it will not give us perfection of spiritual life.
It can help us to bring us to certain level of happiness like Ajamel.
He became liberated also by chanting that offenselessly.
However, pure love of Godhead, positive knowledge of God,
it will not happen by that.
So Prabhupada tells your mechanical chanting of Hare Krishna.
It will get you rid of all the material miseries if you chant and hear nicely, offenselessly.
But unless Krishna is pleased, spiritual master is pleased,
there is no positive spiritual knowledge in life.
There is no positive spiritual bliss in life.
So in order to feel spiritual bliss and positive spiritual knowledge,
a person needs to receive the mantra in this bona fide display succession, Guru shishya parampara.
Just like now if a company has to hire any candidate,
they immediately see the CV of the candidate.
They see whether that person has got degree or not.
There is a standard understanding.
Now people do not even know how to check it.
Just like Gaudiya Sampradaya, followers of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
when they were doing Radha Krishna worship,
which was not introduced earlier by other Acharyas because it is very confidential worship.
Some of the people from bona fide Sampradaya who objected in Jaipur,
why you are worshipping Radha and Krishna?
They are not even married and then they wanted to debate.
But they asked why we should debate with you?
Are you coming in some bona fide Sampradaya?
Because if only you are belonging to bona fide Guru shishya parampara,
your knowledge is perfect and then you can debate basis that knowledge.
Otherwise, what is the use?
Suppose in court, the lawyers say,
Okay, my Lord, let us keep Indian penal court aside and let us argue without it.
So what is the use of such argument?
All the arguments are on the basis of law books, Indian penal court.
In a similar fashion, Krishna, God is having perfect knowledge about this world
and he disseminates his knowledge in four bona fide Sampradaya succession,
Guru shishya parampara.
And if a person belongs to that Sampradaya, then only his knowledge is taken as perfect.
Then you are supposed to debate and argue.
Then people would listen to you.
But nowadays, people do not have such knowledge as they are getting cheated by many people.
So although this knowledge is very simple,
but unless it is received from a spiritual master in proper Guru shishya parampara,
proper bona fide Sampradaya, he will not be able to understand it.
Even though he may keep on reading it many times over, he will not understand.
Only when the spiritual master is completely pleased,
the confidential things, secret things are revealed.
So that is why it is called secret.
Although it is written in Bhagavad Gita, you please read,
but you will not be able to understand unless your spiritual master reveals it unto you.
So now the question is, then how can I take instruction from spiritual master?
I cannot see Prabhupada.
And how can I tell whether Prabhupada is guiding me or not?
And Guru should be having a body.
That is what the conception is.
I was also following some other Guru before I came in touch with the Hare Krishna movement.
And although I understood this is a genuine process,
but I was following previous Guru because I thought,
oh, this Guru is living in a physical body.
He can guide me.
And here Prabhupada has left his physical body.
So how he can guide me?
So that is why let me stick to this old thing.
And then I came across something very wonderful, which I was not knowing.
What is the position of a bona fide Guru?
Actually, so long ago there was a Brahmana and he this Brahman was born in a good family aristocratic family.
And because of such mundane material opulence, as it happens sometimes,
this person, Brahmana, got deviated.
And then he got into all bad habits, especially prostitute hunting.
And every day he started visiting a prostitute.
And it so happened that his father passed away from this world.
And last rites were supposed to be done for the father.
And this person was so much addicted to the prostitute that he told the priests when these last rites are happening,
he was not willing to go in the first place.
And then he went and then he's telling, please quickly finish.
I have to I have to please hurry up.
I have to go.
And then some of the priests finished.
They were wondering what kind of person this is.
His father has died and he's telling, please quickly finish up the things and then quickly finished up all the rights.
And then it started pouring down very heavily.
Now it is raining heavily and it is he has to cross a river to reach the other side of the city.
And now how to cross the river?
The river is flooding and he will get drowned if he crosses the river without any help.
So then somehow we found a log of wood which was floating over there and then he caught it and then he reached the other side.
And then he realized actually it was not a log.
It was a dead body.
So he caught hold of a dead body.
He did not hesitate to catch dead body caught hold of dead body and he crossed the river.
And then immediately, very, very hastily, he reached the place of the prostitute and the prostitute that day.
She thought that today is the last rite of his father, so he may not come.
And then she went inside and he was knocking at the door.
Please open the door.
And she was not hearing.
Now he was so eager to meet her.
It is raining heavily and she is not responding.
Now he went to the other side of her place.
And then how to climb?
Climb the fence.
It was very difficult.
So then he found a snake hanging and without giving second thought, he caught hold of snake and immediately climbed it.
And then when he reached inside the house and then the prostitute, she got shocked.
Oh, you have come today.
So I was not expecting.
How did you reach?
And then he narrated, Oh, I am so much fond of you.
I love you so much.
I got hold of a dead body to cross the river.
And then I caught hold of a snake.
And this is how I have climbed the fence to reach your house.
And then the prostitute told this much love you have for this temporary body, which is made of flesh and bones.
If this much attraction you have for Krishna, how nice your life would be.
And as soon as he heard this, immediately something struck him.
And he told, Yes, you're right.
And immediately he departed for Vrindavan.
And who was this great saint?
So he was a very great saint.
His name is Bilva Mangal Thakur.
So Bilva Mangal Thakur became a pure devotee of Krishna.
And he wrote very wonderful scriptures like Krishnakarna Amrita, which even Chaitanya Mahaprabhu would relish.
Just imagine God himself, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu himself is relishing the scriptures of somebody.
What would be his position?
How exalted the person would be?
So Bilva Mangal Thakur.
Actually, it is mentioned that he was a very, very advanced spiritualist in his previous life, but he could not finish the journey very nicely.
So he fell down from his position.
There are nine stages of spiritual life.
He reached the eighth level of spiritual life.
From there he fell down.
So that is why it is told a person should be very, very cautious.
Generally, after fourth stage, a person does not fall back to material platform.
But there are some exceptions.
Bharat Maharaj and Bilva Mangal Thakur, they fell from the eighth stage also.
Eighth stage is the stage when a person starts feeling emotions towards Krishna and he fell down from that platform.
But spiritual knowledge is never lost.
And next life, as soon as there is some association, immediately a person is able to quickly come to that, revive that position of previous life.
Now, how Bilva Mangal Thakur was able to revive this knowledge immediately and that too from prostitutes.
She was not very advanced lady or very advanced spiritualist.
So actually, it is mentioned by the Acharyas that Bilva Mangal Thakur, spiritual master of previous life, he spoke through the prostitute.
Thus, these words became immediately effective and penetrated his heart.
So thus, spiritual master, it is told,
Spiritual master is eternal spiritual master.
And people do not know it is the principle.
That is why Chaitanya Mahaprabhu forbade his disciples, do not accept many students.
He told, when you become spiritual master, please do not accept many disciples.
Because the spiritual master has to take the sins of the disciple upon himself and suffer a token amount for that sins.
So people would be very, very cautious to accept the disciples.
And once somebody has got a bona fide spiritual master, then Janmai Janmai Prabhu say, as long as the disciple is stuck in the material world,
spiritual master also cannot leave the material world.
He has to stay till all of his disciples are liberated.
So once a disciple asked Prabhupada, because they came across this principle of the relationship between the spiritual master and disciple,
that Philip Prabhupada, so we know that spiritual master is eternal.
And unless all his disciples are liberated, he will not go back to spiritual world.
So is it fact, Philip Prabhupada? Prabhupada told, yes, it is fact.
But don't take advantage of this. Try to liberate yourself in this life itself.
Don't let me come here over and over again to liberate you.
So don't take advantage. However, this is fact.
Life after life, a bona fide spiritual master will keep guiding the disciple unless he is liberated.
Once any soul takes shelter of such a pure devotee spiritual master, spiritual master becomes obliged to liberate the disciples.
So this is the significance of accepting a spiritual master, an extraordinary position.
Once if a person surrenders spiritual master, he will try life after life to liberate that person unless he goes, he will stay here.
So does the spiritual master spoke through the prostitute?
So spiritual master is not limited by his body.
We should not limit spiritual master to body because we are not the body.
This is the first conception of Bhagavad Gita or spiritual life.
And spiritual master is a liberated personality unless he is liberated beyond the laws of nature.
Then how he can liberate us, Prabhupada tells.
Unless somebody himself, his hands are tied, how he can free somebody as somebody else.
So a person should be completely freed from laws of nature.
And one such stringent law of nature is death, as sure as death.
So spiritual master is beyond death.
Prabhupada explains,
And those people who are advanced, so Prabhupada very nicely tells how Roop Goswami he guided Prabhupada.
How Prabhupada spiritual master he gave indication, now you go to the west and he was always guiding Prabhupada.
So spiritual master is not limited by his body.
So as happened in the case of Bilvamangal Thakur, simply heard his spiritual master spoke and immediately it struck him.
Yes, I should follow this.
And then he continued on his journey to Vrindavan and continued to live for 700 years in Vrindavan.
He appeared around 1500 years ago and lived for 700 years.
Just imagine and without and there is a story how he lost his eyes.
Maybe I will cover in future sessions.
So without any vision, so Bilvamangal Thakur, he continued to live for 700 years.
And Krishna personally would come to him and listen to his wonderful, his compositions which he made.
So thus, we should not think that spiritual master is this body.
So let me read some very nice quotes about understanding a spiritual master, who is spiritual master actually and how we can receive guidance from spiritual master.
So Srila Prabhupada very nicely explains.
So this Srila Prabhupada is explaining.
This is mentioned in Sri Chaitanya Charita Amrita, Ante Leela, Chapter 5.
It is mentioned, although according to material vision, his divine grace, Srila Bhakti Siddhanta Sarasvati Thakur Prabhupada passed away from this material world.
On the last day of December 1936, I still consider his divine grace to be always present with me by his Vani, his words.
There are two ways of association, by Vani and by Vapu.
Vani means words and Vapu means physical presence.
Physical presence is sometimes appreciable and sometimes not, but Vani continues to exist eternally.
Therefore, one must take advantage of the Vani, not the physical presence.
Then in Room Conversation in Vrindavan, 1977, somebody asked Prabhupada that who will guide us, Prabhupada, after your physical departure?
So Prabhupada explains, I shall remain your personal guide, physically present or not physically present.
So Prabhupada is telling, I shall always remain and what kind of guide?
Just like we have mass classes, 200 or 400 students are sitting and teacher is explaining something.
So that is mass instruction.
But when we go to the doctor, what does the doctor tell?
He checks our pulses and then he gives the very right medicine, the right diet and right things that we are supposed to follow.
The medicine, the recommendation, prescription will be very, very unique for the person.
Doctor cannot make 400 people sit and then he can treat everyone.
No, personal guidance is required.
Thus, personal instruction of spiritual master is required because we all are having some unique disease.
So how a person, especially after his physical departure, can give personal instruction?
So Prabhupada told, I shall remain your personal guide.
Not that I've written something in the book, some common things and you read.
No, I shall remain your personal guide, physically present or not physically present, as I am getting guidance from my Guru Maharaj.
Just like Bilal Mangal Thakur's Guru Maharaj knew, why should I speak now through the prostitute so that he gets this understanding in the heart?
In this way, a pure devotee spiritual master, he can speak through his disciples, he can speak through his books,
he can speak through even a materialist, he can speak in any way.
He can adopt any ways and means to convey the right message to the disciple.
But that message is always very personal.
Prabhupada tells, when you are reading Bhagavad Gita, you should read with the understanding that this is Krishna's personal instruction to me.
So thus, spiritual life is always personal.
Whenever you are hearing a lecture, it is not that it is a common knowledge which is being spread to everyone.
No, the knowledge will be revealed to you basis, your status in spiritual life.
How much pleasure we have given to our spiritual master.
How much my spiritual master is satisfied with me.
To that degree, the knowledge of spiritual life will be revealed to the disciples.
That is what sometimes people tell.
Prabhu, I have been reading. Stop sharing the screen.
So many times the devotees tell that, Prabhu, I am reading, but I find the same thing written on every page.
And bird death, old age disease, eating, waiting, sleeping, defending.
And I find the same thing is being repeated in every book.
And some devotees tell, Prabhu, it is so nice.
I am reading this small book and I am getting newer meanings now.
When I read it again, I get even newer meanings.
I am doing the same book over and over again.
It means the same book is revealing him different knowledge.
And another person, he is changing many, many books, but he is feeling it is the same knowledge to him.
Because spiritual master is not revealing the knowledge.
So knowledge is revealed, basis satisfaction of spiritual master.
It is highly personal knowledge.
Whether we are hearing lecture, we are reading books, it is personal instruction.
Basis R level, we are guided.
So Prabhupada explained to him, whether I am physically present or future, I am not physically present.
I shall always remain your personal guide.
In Bhagavatam lecture in 1968, Prabhupada again mentions,
so we should associate by vibration and not by the physical presence.
That is real association.
So Prabhupada explained that a mosquito is also sitting on the lap of the king.
But is mosquito serving the king? He is biting the king.
So that is why Prabhupada told all my God brothers,
they had lot of physical association with my spiritual master.
And I could hardly meet my spiritual master three to four times in my entire life.
So how Prabhupada received this wonderful knowledge that he was able to spread it to the entire world.
Prabhupada met his spiritual master just three to four times in his entire life.
So thus Prabhupada always stressed, it is association by Vani, by words, instructions which is important
and not the physical presence.
In elevation to Krishna consciousness, again Prabhupada explains,
it's a very nice small book.
There are two conceptions, the physical conception and the vibrational conception.
The physical conception is temporary, the vibrational conception is eternal.
When we feel separation from Krishna or the spiritual master,
we should just try to remember their words or instructions.
And we will no longer feel that separation.
Such association with Krishna and the spiritual master should be association by vibration,
not physical presence. That is real association.
I am always with you. Never mind if I am physically absent.
Prabhupada wrote to Jayananda Prabhu in a letter.
Never mind if I am physically absent, I am always present with you.
So another devotee in a lecture, he asks question.
So sometimes spiritual master is far away. He may be in Los Angeles.
Somebody is coming to Hamburg Temple.
It's a place in Germany, I think.
He thinks, how will the spiritual master be pleased?
Because we understood satisfaction of spiritual master
is the basis of spiritual advancement, spiritual instructions.
So if somebody is in Hamburg and spiritual master may be in Los Angeles.
So how can a person sitting in Germany figure out
that my spiritual master in Los Angeles is satisfied by my thing?
How do I know that I am satisfying my master?
Srila Prabhupada explained.
Just follow his order.
Spiritual master is along with you by his words.
Just like my spiritual master is not physically present,
but I am associating with him by his words.
In Srimad Bhagavatam, 4th kanto 28, verse 47, it is explained.
The disciple and spiritual master never separated.
So it is not good to think I am here, my spiritual master is somewhere else.
Prabhupada is explaining.
The disciple and spiritual master are never separated
because the spiritual master always keeps company with the disciple
as long as the disciple follows strictly the instructions of the spiritual master.
This is called the association of Vani in bracket words.
Physical presence is called Vapu.
As long as the spiritual master is physically present,
the disciple should serve the physical body of the spiritual master.
So that is definitely important.
When Prabhupada was present, disciples would try to give him all service.
Disciples would try to give massage to his body
or give him some fan or offer him some food stuffs,
put some umbrella over his head
and do any kind of physical service which he can do.
Because there is very quick and the quickest way of spiritual advancement,
serving spiritual master.
So this is called serving Vapu, serving body,
washing his lotus feet and all these things.
So the disciple should serve the physical body of the spiritual master
as long as the spiritual master is physically present.
And when the spiritual master is no longer physically existing,
the disciple should leave him and go to another master who is present?
No.
When the spiritual master is no longer physically existing,
the disciple should serve the instructions of the spiritual master.
So there is no difference just like we tell Krishna is incarnated in the form of his name.
There is no difference between personality of Krishna and his instructions in Bhagavad Gita.
In a similar fashion, there is no difference between any of the personalities
who are on liberated platform, their form and their instructions and their names.
When you see the painting of Arjuna, Arjuna is present in his painting.
When you see painting of Yashoda, Yashoda is present in the painting or in the deity, in the temple.
So all the liberated personalities, pure devotees, they are on absolute platform.
On absolute platform, there is no difference between person, his form, his instructions, anything.
So if a person is always meditating upon the instructions and trying to follow the instructions,
it means he is constantly in touch with the Guru.
And because Guru is as pure as Krishna, because of his being constantly connected to Krishna,
as soon as we connect ourselves to Guru, so we also start purifying ourselves.
And if we are constantly touching Guru, taking his association,
the disciple also becomes completely purified and his spiritual life becomes successful.
So thus, these are not right. These are mundane and material concepts.
In material dimensions, we tell spiritual master is thousand miles away.
We are not concerned with material separation.
Bilvamangal Thakur was guided in next life also.
And there are many such instances.
Life after life, spiritual master guides the disciples.
So once he was giving a class and then a small boy, he came and he was listening to him very, very intently.
And then it was observed he's coming in, although he's a small boy, young boy,
but he's very, very attentively hearing Prabhupada, very peacefully, very nicely, although children cannot hear.
So then Prabhupada explained to the disciples that in previous life he was my disciple.
So he has come again now to continue a spiritual life.
So life after life, there is arrangement that a person will be guided by spiritual master.
And even for that matter, those people who have doubt that without physical presence,
how we can have instruction, even when the spiritual masters are present,
Prabhupada explains the principle.
There is one guru and thousands of disciples in Gurukul.
Just like there are thousands of people in a school.
So earlier they were going to Gurukul and now one guru would guide thousands of them.
So the guru will guide the senior most disciples.
They will guide their juniors.
They will guide their juniors in this way.
The information would come down.
The instruction would come down.
So in a similar fashion, Sheila Prabhupada, when he was physically present also,
not that people would ask him just very close.
Ten, twelve people who are able to have frequent association with Prabhupada.
So otherwise everyone was supposed to ask their authorities,
just like all of you are there from various parts of the country.
You have come here.
Some devotee has guided you to hear the sessions.
So you can simply try to follow that devotee very, very nicely.
And then that devotee is also following his authority.
Some other senior devotees.
They are also following some other in this way.
Everyone is guided very nicely.
But it is not that that person is giving us instruction.
Sheila Prabhupada only is guiding this instruction.
He has chosen his disciples to disseminate this knowledge.
Just like below Mangal Thakur, he was given instruction through that lady.
So spiritual master only guides personally, basis our service.
The more service we are rendering in good attitude,
the more spiritual master will reveal instructions through this nice system.
So this is the secret of success of spiritual life.
When we surrender to a spiritual master and try to take his association
and how to take his association by always remembering and following his instructions very strictly.
So in this way, when we are always associating with the spiritual master, serving him,
serving can be done for physical body, serving can be done on instructions, serving instructions,
the form of spiritual master, which is present in the form of instructions,
serving that is more important.
So Sheila Prabhupada here, he's serving instructions of his guru.
His guru told him to preach Krishna consciousness across the world.
So thus, when we help Prabhupada in executing the desire of his spiritual master,
our spiritual master becomes very, very pleased and Krishna also becomes very, very pleased.
So we'll see in the 18th chapter end of Bhagavad Gita that Krishna is telling,
I've explained everything to you, Arjuna, the most confidential knowledge.
Now please explain this to others.
A person who explains to others, he's the dearest devotee to me.
The quickest way of getting recognized by Krishna is to spread this knowledge to others.
So thus, I request all of you, spiritual life is so simple.
We have seen man-mana, think of Krishna, bhau mad bhakto, become his devotee by chanting, by hearing, reading his instructions.
We can become offering food to Krishna.
We can become his devotee.
Madhyaaji, offer respects to Krishna and worship Krishna.
Very simple.
And we become his devotee simply by following this thing.
Always keep on thinking of Krishna by chanting his names.
Very simple process.
By this, our spiritual life will become very soon perfect.
So that this knowledge is revealed to you nicely.
So I request all of you, please try to follow this most important instruction.
The most important instruction of Prabhupada is to chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra very, very nicely, attentively every day.
So please do that.
If 16 rounds is not possible, decide for yourself.
Try to avoid forceful activities and then preach this to others.
It is Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's instruction.
Bharat bhumila janma malushe hai layar.
We follow the instructions of superior authorities.
So we should not reject God's instruction.
Every person who has got the body of Bharat Varsha India, he has special instruction from God.
What is that instruction?
So these bodies are very unique in one thing, in their spiritual acumen.
Janmasartha kari par kar paropkar.
Please make your life successful by understanding this knowledge and then explain this to others.
So every Indian is supposed to become Guru.
Guru in the sense spread this knowledge, not like Prabhupada that you can take people back to Godhead,
but spread this knowledge to everyone.
What simple things we have heard we have simply we should try to repeat this knowledge to other people.
So I request all of you to understand and to the degree you are understanding,
please keep explaining to others also.
By following the simple thing, our spiritual life would be successful.
So how do we know I am following Prabhupada?
Prabhupada will give me instructions if we follow his words very, very nicely.
They are there with us in the form of books in the form of his lectures.
So just keep on hearing nicely and keep on following the authorities.
Prabhupada explains, just like in company, if you have to follow the proprietor,
then you follow your immediate manager.
Immediate manager is happy, then you get promotion.
If he is not happy, you may be ousted from the company.
In a similar fashion, Prabhupada told, we also have immediate boss.
Somebody will be your spiritual guide.
So please try to follow his instructions very, very nicely.
Through him, try to understand and serve Prabhupada, try to follow mission.
So with this, we would end here.
The last lesson, the most confidential knowledge.
Always think of Krishna.
This is the most confidential knowledge.
Become his devotee.
