So we discussed Lord Krishna is mentioning that this knowledge is Rajavidya, the king
of all knowledge, whatever education we have.
If we arrive at the summit of education, the conclusion of all education that is mentioned
in this chapter of Bhagavad Gita, and it is very, very confidential knowledge.
And who can understand this Anasuya way, a person who is not envious of Krishna, envious
persons, they cannot understand it.
So Krishna tells this knowledge Mukshase Asubhat.
We have various sufferings in this world, various miseries in this world.
Krishna is offering a great hope that if you understand this knowledge, Yaj Gyaatva Moksha
se Asubhat, it will make you free from all the sufferings of this world and other world
and whatever.
Now one may tell, oh, this spiritual life Bhagavad Gita is very difficult to follow.
Yes, if I follow this, I may be able to cross over all the miseries of life.
But then it is very, very difficult to follow.
So then Krishna tells in the proceeding verse, Krishna tells, no, it is not very difficult
to follow the most confidential knowledge, the topmost knowledge.
It is very, very pleasant to perform.
There's no exertion required.
However, then why people are not able to take to it, that Krishna explains further
that we saw in the last class.
So Krishna is telling those people who even after hearing these instructions are not able
to put faith, Krishna has explained in the Bhagavad Gita, especially in the chapters
seventh and eighth, how his supreme personality and attaining him, reaching back to him is
the ultimate aim of life.
There is a spiritual world which is called Vaikuntha, which is called Tripad Vibhuti.
Tripad means three portions.
And this material world is called Ekapad Vibhuti, which means one portion out of four.
That is 25 percent.
So this material world, entire cosmos that we see, or we don't see actually, we live
in just one universe.
And the Vedas explain like this, there are many, many millions and millions of universes.
And our universe is one of the smallest of all the universes.
So all these millions and millions of universes, they also constitute just 25 percent of the
energy of Krishna, Ekapad Vibhuti.
And Tripad Vibhuti, 75 percent of Krishna's energy, they make up the spiritual world.
So the aim of life is to transfer ourselves from this material world to spiritual world.
Mrityurma Amritam Gamay, as we have read maybe in our Sanskrit texts, if you have read in
the school, Tamasoma Jyotir Gamaya, this material world is full of darkness and we need some
external illumination to make it bright.
So that is called Tamas.
Tamas means darkness and ignorance.
Jyotir Gamaya, from darkness, you reach to illumination.
The spiritual world is completely illuminated.
Just like here, one planet's sun, it emits light.
Similarly, in spiritual world, everything is emitting light.
Even the bodies of all the living entities over there, they emit light.
The animals, the stones, the trees, the waters, everything is completely effulgent.
So Krishna explains in Bhagavad Gita the nature of that world.
Just like Srila Prabhupada explains when he went to America in 1965 and then he saw America
is totally different and so much more advanced than India.
Whatever things we are seeing now, the development, they were having skyscrapers over there at
that time itself.
They were having metros at that time.
In 1940, Metro was there in America.
In India, it just came recently a decade ago.
So they were super advanced.
So Krishna tells, what is the nature of that spiritual world?
Obviously, that place should be very, very special where God is living.
So we are trying to make things intelligent here by putting artificial intelligence.
But the question is, who has given us this intelligence, which is called natural intelligence
by which we can create artificial intelligence.
So this natural intelligence is present in the spiritual world and everything is naturally
intelligent.
Everything is completely conscious.
So it is told in the spiritual world, all the trees, there are desired trees, they are
completely conscious.
Here the tree is a very, very dull living entity.
When a person is very, very lusty, then that such a person is transformed into a tree life.
Just like the sons of Kuvera who were acting very lustily, Narad Muni cursed them to become
trees and stand there naked for a very long time.
So tree is very, very lusty living entity.
In order to regulate his movements, so nature gives the body of a tree.
cosmic order is under me, by my will it is manifested again and again, and by my will
it is annihilated at the end.
So whatever creation happens, destruction happens, or some disturbance happens, everything
happens perfectly as per the will of Krishna.
Krishna is telling whole cosmic order is under me.
Prakritim Svam Avasthabhya, Avasam Prakritir Vashat, under obligation, entire thing is
under control of Krishna, nothing is happening by chance.
Oh, so Krishna is under a lot of tension, just like a CEO is in a lot of tension, everything
is under control of the CEO and then he is not able to sleep at all.
So much pressure is there in the market.
So Krishna is telling, no, my situation is not like that.
Nachamam Tani Karmani Nibaddhanti Dhananjaya, Udhaseena Vadaaseenam Asaktam Teshu Karmashu
O Dhananjaya, all this work cannot bind me, I am ever detached, seated as though neutral.
Just like a judge or a king, he is sitting neutrally.
If a person does good activity, he would give rewards, if a person does bad activity, he
will be punished for his wrongdoings.
But the judge is neutral.
So Krishna is also neutral.
It is not that he wants to punish somebody so he is punishing, no, he has created laws
of nature, his agents are there under their action as per the laws living entities are
enjoying or suffering.
Just like a rich man Mukesh Ambani, he has various departments, he is not personally
bothered in day to day affairs.
In a similar fashion, Krishna has many, many agents, many energies, they take care of the
material world.
But Krishna is not personally involved in the affairs of this world.
Everything happens as per the laws under the control of his agents.
Mayadhyakshena prakriti hi suyate saccharacharam, hetunane na kaunteya jagadviparivayatate
Very important shloka.
The material nature is working under my direction, O son of Kunti, and it is producing all moving
and unmoving beings.
By its rule, this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.
Mayadhyakshena prakriti hi.
So the scientists are able to understand nature is working very, very intelligently.
Just like in California, there would be a lot of fire.
And when the scientists they advanced, they thought that this fire should be avoided.
Now we are advanced.
Scientists used our advanced knowledge of fire extinguishers and some technology and
control this raging fire.
And then they applied all the technology and they stopped the fire.
And then fire erupted again.
Again they stopped the fire.
Like this after doing it for a couple of times, they are feeling so nice.
So yes, just see, we avoided this fire.
And then a great fire came.
And then they were not able to stop it and it was a cause of mass destruction.
So later they realized actually these fires, small fires, it is a very wonderful arrangement
of nature.
When this fire happens, the soil also gets replenished.
And it is very much important to maintain the ecosystem.
And these small, small fires, when it happens, it saves the city or the country or the village
from fire.
Because some leaves have fallen, they have become dried by friction of some woods.
Those dry leaves and dry trees would get burnt.
But if you stop fire, there is, when the dry leaves, there is a big gathering of dry leaves
and dry things, woods in the jungle, then it will lead to great fire.
This you will not be able to stop.
Then they stopped controlling the fires.
They thought nature controls itself very, very nicely.
This fire is very good to stop big fire.
And this fire is important for replenishing the ecosystem.
So in this way, they see how this nature is working so very nicely.
There is a flower, there are grains, and then there are insects who can detect where flower
has come out, where grain has come out, where the bud has come out.
It would sit on the bud, sit on the flower, carry the pollens.
And then there is fertilization, grain would come out, and then we would be able to eat
that grain.
How nature is working so nicely.
Who has given the sensors to the insect to detect where the flower has come out?
Isn't it?
So how this perfect ecosystem is there?
Who has given the instruments to the bee?
How to take out nectar from the flower?
Even the best of the scientists cannot take out honey from the flower.
Only Krishna, a scientist, has given the bee the mechanism to take out that honey and given
the intelligence how to store that honey also very, very nicely.
So nature is working very, very intelligently.
However, intelligence doesn't float in air.
That is what Krishna is telling here.
Maya adhyaksena prakriti, the prakriti is acting under my control.
Just like yesterday we discussed, a foolish thief may think every time I commit robbery,
I steal something from somebody's house, this policeman comes and arrests me.
So if I remove this policeman somehow, then I'll be happy.
Nobody would arrest me.
He's foolish.
Ultimately, King has set up a system.
If you do something to that policeman, another policeman would be sent.
In a similar fashion, nature is working under Krishna's control.
If without following Krishna, you try to fiddle with the nature, you will suffer much more
from the punishment.
So that is what people are doing now.
Without following the King, without following Krishna, they are fiddling, trying to control
the nature.
And this nature is very powerful, not like ordinary policemen whom you can give a slap
and run away.
Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita, duratyaya, my nature is very, very strong.
So why?
What is the purpose of all these things?
Why such strong nature is there?
We are put under hold of such strong nature.
So actually this material world is a reformation center.
The purpose of this material world is to correct the illicit enjoying tendency of the living
entity.
Enjoyment is not prohibited, but people, we foolish conditioned souls out of envy do
not know how to enjoy.
Enjoyment for wife is allowed, but with the husband, not with any other man.
Similarly, enjoyment for the husband is allowed, but with the wife, not any other woman.
Husband should stay honest, wife should remain chaste.
Enjoyment is allowed, but with the commitments that you have in life.
In a similar fashion, the living entities, right enjoyment is enjoyment in the service
of Krishna.
Now Krishna is not a narcissist, a very, very demanding personality, serve me or else go
to material world and suffer, go to jail.
No, Krishna understands there is no benevolent personality like me.
Other living entities cannot show love to you.
They will create an illusion of love because actually they want to please their own senses.
That is what happens in the material world.
An illusion of love is created because my senses are getting pleased by the other person.
As soon as you join some company, so one of our students, he joined a very nice company,
one of the best companies of the world, and he was very happy.
Company was sending him Cadbury chocolates and flowers and greeting before he joined
the job.
And he was very happy posting on the Facebook and Insta, see how companies so nice it is
sending greetings.
And once he joined the company, he realized when he's crying, there is a lot of pressure.
So here there is an illusion of love company HR will tell, Oh, you are so nice.
You are so good.
They will take so good care of you.
But ultimately there is self-interest involved.
So in this material world, everyone is self-interested that Krishna knows nobody apart from me can
show love to you.
Just like a small child, sometimes he would kill the father because father is not allowing
him to play the game.
Similarly, some living entities become very, very envious and they are called big demons
like her and Ravana.
They want to kill God.
Just like a child may want to kill his father because he's not allowing him to enjoy.
And that enjoyment is harmful for the soul only.
But the soul is so envious.
It wants to kill the father.
And some people are not so envious.
They just leave the house.
So that is the case with many of us.
It is just like a son tells, I am doing my duties very nicely.
What is the use of talking to father or visiting him?
If you're not taking care of your father, you are useless.
You should be obliged to him.
So thus, Krishna understands the living entity.
Nobody can satisfy living entity without me.
So when the living entity develops this envious attitude, this material world is created.
And here also living entity will not suffer unless he breaks the laws of nature.
Krishna is so nice.
But because the living entity is envious of Krishna, he comes here, becomes envious of
every living entity out of uncontrolled lust, greed and tendency to dominate others.
He creates problems for himself and for others.
So does this material world nature controls us and gives us miseries.
So by taking these miseries slowly, the living entity is supposed to correct his tendency
for enjoyment.
Just like a father may slap the son also at times.
And son may not realize at that time why father is slapping me, why he is chastising me.
But when he grows up, he realizes that if my father, when he saw me smoking, he slapped
me.
Had he not slapped me, I would have spoiled myself, would have died, developed cancer
by now.
So a devotee being wise, so people ask, what is the use of following spiritual life?
Devotees also suffer.
There is suffering in life of devotees also.
So there are various categories of devotees.
The neophyte devotees can actually suffer because they are not following the rules and regulations
nicely.
Prabhupada tells books will keep you convinced and Sankirtan will keep you happy.
If you are not doing Sankirtan, the sadhana very very nicely, you will not be happy.
And simply if you focus on sadhana, you will be very happy.
You do Sankirtan nicely, you will be very very happy.
So when we don't follow the rules and regulations, we break the regulative principles, then we
will suffer from sinful reactions.
Because even though we have become devotees, still we are breaking the laws of nature.
We are not surrendered to Krishna.
Unless somebody completely surrenders to government, he breaks one small rule.
Let me break the traffic signal, a punishment will come.
Let me not wear the helmet, punishment will come.
So unless somebody completely surrenders to Krishna, now who is willing to surrender?
They don't even read Bhagavad Gita.
Bhagavan borne bolne do.
We are not bothered.
And famous religious teachers are telling there is no need of Bhagavad Gita.
I saw somebody shared the video with me and that foolish person is telling, I have never
read Bhagavad Gita and when I get time, I read magazines and newspapers, he is telling.
How foolish.
God has come here out of great compassion.
He is teaching some very important things and we are not interested in understanding
the instructions of God.
So where is the question of surrender?
We don't bother to understand what King is telling me.
So when a living entity completely surrenders to Krishna, immediately karmic reaction stops.
Whatever bad things he has done in the past, he was supposed to suffer, but now karmic
reaction stops.
But those devotees who are surrendered, they also suffer at times.
They also may get disease.
They also may appear that they are suffering from sinful reactions.
Prabhu Krishna toh kyaate hain sarva dharmana parityajya sab kardo, achche se follow karo
rules and regulations.
I will free you from all the sinful reactions.
But mujhe toh abhi bhi suffering aa rahi hai, suffering kyu aa rahi hai.
So Srila Prabhupada explains nicely.
Let me read it for you.
So this is from Lord Brahma's prayers, 10th canto of Bhagavatam.
It is explained, Lord Krishna explains in the Bhagavad Gita that a devotee who fully
surrenders unto him is no longer liable to suffer the reactions of his previous karma.
However, because in his mind, a devotee may still maintain the remnants of his previous
sinful mentality, the Lord removed the last vestiges of the enjoying spirit by giving
his devotee punishments that may sometimes resemble sinful reactions.
So here it is mentioned, when a devotee fully surrenders, he is not liable to suffer the
reactions.
But in mind, such sinful tendency is there still.
The Lord removed the last vestiges of the enjoying spirit by giving his devotee punishments
that may sometimes resemble sinful reactions.
The purpose of entire creation of God is to rectify the living entity's tendency to enjoy
without Lord.
If the husband or wife has tendency to enjoy without the partner, it is not a right desire.
Similarly, when the living entity desires to enjoy without Lord, that is not the right
desire, entire material world is designed to correct that tendency.
And therefore, the particular punishment given for a sinful activity is specifically
designed to curtail the mentality that produced the activity.
Although a devotee has surrendered to the Lord's devotional service, until he is completely
perfect in Krishna consciousness, he may maintain a slight inclination to enjoy the false happiness
of this world.
The Lord therefore creates, even though he may not be acting sinfully, but in the heart,
some desire can be there, and desire is there even after we surrender, some desires are
there, even though he is not acting, but any time devotee can act and he will suffer.
So to remove the last vestiges of that hope that maybe this will give me happiness, let
me try it.
To remove that, Krishna gives such suffering which appears like a karmic reaction, however
devotee is free from all the karmic reaction.
This unhappiness suffered by a sincere devotee, sincere devotee would also suffer in the beginning
unless he becomes paramansa.
This unhappiness suffered by a sincere devotee is not technically a karmic reaction.
It is rather the Lord's special mercy for inducing his devotee to completely let go
of the material world and return home back to Godhead.
A sincere devotee earnestly desires to go back to the Lord's abode, therefore he willingly
accepts the Lord's merciful punishment and continues offering respects and obeisances
to the Lord with his heart, words and body.
Such a bona fide servant of the Lord considering all hardship, a small price to pay for gaining
the personal association of the Lord certainly becomes a legitimate son of God.
So it is told, when a devotee who is completely surrendered to Krishna, surrendered to Krishna
means surrendered to the Guru who is teaching us what are the instructions of Krishna.
When he is completely surrendering himself to the Guru, entire moment of his life he
follows the instructions of the Guru, he does not take independent decision.
Such a devotee when he suffers, sometimes devotees ask, oh why am I still suffering
from the disease, I am chanting 16 rounds, I am doing this thing, no a sincere devotee
doesn't think like that.
So a sincere devotee when he suffers, very nice shloka it is, it tells,
Tatya anukampam su-sameeksha mano, bunjane vatma kriyatam vipaakam, hridavagva purabhir
viddhan damaste.
He understands, still the tendency, my tendency to enjoy material world is not completely
gone.
I have some hope of enjoyment in material world.
So to correct that, very very mercifully some disease is coming, some mental disturbance
is coming, some calamity may be happening in my life.
So just like a father may slap the son, son may become angry, but when the devotee is
slapped by Krishna, hridavagva purabhir viddhan namaste, with his heart, with his speech,
with his body, he offers respect to the Lord.
The Lord slaps the devotee and the devotee offers respect.
The Lord again slaps and the devotee again offers respect.
He understands Krishna is trying to cure my mentality by giving some small dosage of punishment.
And that is out of great mercy.
Just like somebody was telling me, when people get cancer, they have to undergo chemotherapy.
And this chemotherapy's misery is more miserable than death.
Sometimes people tell why I don't die.
This chemotherapy is much more miserable.
However, if a person wants to live, undergoing that punishment is important.
A bitter medicine, sometimes it is important to save us from further misery.
So a person does not revolt.
Why doctor, you are giving me some bitter food to eat?
No, he understands it's for my good.
In a similar fashion, it is a foolish concept of life that I should remove all the sufferings
of my life.
I'm chanting 16 rounds, I'm reading Bhagavad Gita, doing morning program, and then sometimes
some suffering can happen.
And then the devotee leaves the sadhana.
Oh, Prabhu, I need to study more.
I need to attend office more.
I need to do this thing.
So such a devotee may leave the sadhana.
So this is not the right understanding.
We are here to correct this mentality and go back to Krishna.
Mukta Sangha Param Vrajayat.
Go back to the spiritual world and attain a life without birth, death, old age and disease.
So our aim is life is not to avoid these miseries.
If you want to avoid the misery of surgery, how you can ever cure your disease.
So you should simply follow the instructions of Guru.
And when you follow those instructions, some miseries happen.
So take those miseries in just in good spirit.
Some bad name you may get in society.
You will become poor also.
That is all right.
Please do not try to fix the material situations which come the reverses which come on the
path of devotional service.
When you have surrendered completely to Krishna, whatever is coming in your life, it is a mercy
of Krishna.
Krishna is telling nothing happens by chance when you are perfectly following Krishna's
instructions.
There is a cause of any wrong thing happening in your life.
So with this faith, we should execute devotional service perfectly.
All the rules should be followed very, very strictly.
Do not mind.
Oh, my business.
I'm giving less time to business, more time to Sadhana Bhakti.
I will earn less money.
You can see Anil Ambani put all the time in business.
Now he has lost everything.
Many people have lost airlines are finishing and many things are happening.
Even Jeff Bezos says Amazon can close any day.
It is the biggest company of the world, but he tells it is a fact we have to accept.
No company has remained rich eternally.
Companies are created and they are destroyed.
There is a lot of this material world.
So in a similar fashion, please do not fear any loss in this life, especially when you
are on the path of devotional service.
Follow everything very and yes, Krishna does not give whimsical instruction.
You leave everything and follow Krishna, this practical instruction, little time we have
to take out for Krishna every day.
And then you carry on with your vocational duties.
However, never leave your Sadhana, your rules and regulations, fearing that I will lose
something.
I will lose some comforts.
I may lose some health or I may lose something.
No.
So entire duties of one Ashrama system are designed like that.
If a person follows those duties nicely, just like Lord Ramachandra, son is always supposed
to follow the father.
Father told you go to jungle immediately.
Now that was a whimsical decision.
You may tell father why you are telling this thing.
It is not good for anyone.
But no, the duty of son is to follow the father, whatever father is telling without
argument.
Lord Ramachandra followed immediately left for jungle.
Similarly, the citizens are supposed to follow the king.
There is no question of revolting against the king.
And the king is supposed to follow the Brahmanas.
The Brahmanas are supposed to follow Krishna.
In this way, the whole society is followed is run very, very nicely.
So thus, we should simply follow our duty and we should not worry even about our death.
We have to see what is my duty and we have to follow the duty very nicely, just like
the soldier soldier may die doing his duty, but he's supposed to do that.
And that will glorify a soldier.
If he runs from the battlefield, that is not going to fetch him anything.
So thus, we should not worry about death.
If we die doing our duty very nicely, next body would be very nice.
That is why Shatriyas, they become very happy when there is fighting opportunity, because
if they die fighting on the battlefield, they'll be promoted to heavenly planets in better
comforts of life.
So these are very fine understanding of this material world and spiritual life.
So even material duties are so important, when we do our duty very nicely, never mind
some losses, our tendency to enjoy independent of Krishna is getting cured in the heart.
And what to speak of spiritual life.
So all these material duties we can leave only if they are against the instruction of
Krishna or spiritual master.
So at all costs, we should try to follow the instructions of Krishna, which are mentioned
instructions of Guru and please never be worried about miseries.
Never try to avoid the miseries.
All those miseries on the path of Krishna consciousness, they are corrective measures
to take us out of this material world.
And there are some miseries on the life of the great exalted Vaishnavas also, like Pandavas
and like you can see Jatayu and in Lord Ramchandra's pastime, Lord Hanuman, his tail was set on
fire.
So why these devotees, they suffer Prabhupada, he got two heart attacks.
Was Krishna trying to correct his enjoying mentality?
No, these are liberated personality sent by Krishna.
They don't have any enjoying mentality.
But through them, Krishna wants to teach us how a devotee should lead this life in trying
circumstances.
So they lead us by their example, even though there could be any difficulty rather devotee
is very, very eager to take difficulties in the service of Krishna.
Thus actual devotees do not suffer.
So called suffering is a great mercy of Krishna.
He always remains surrendered.
However, there is one way to avoid those sufferings also.
The sufferings are destined.
So when we do tapasya, what is tapasya?
People do fasts like tomorrow is Ramnami, appearance day of Lord Ramchandra.
So we are supposed to fast tomorrow, sunrise till sunset.
Ideally, we should not drink water.
If it is not possible, drink some water, or if it is not at all possible, even with water
you cannot live, have some juices or fruits, but don't take at least full meals.
Ideally, try to manage with water, at least sunrise to sunset.
Now, stomach will give you trouble.
There is a lot of misery.
So this is called tapasya.
As per your actions in the past life, some corrective measure, some misery is designed
to come.
Some suffering is designed to come.
When you do tapasya, you get up in the morning, even though you are tired at night.
You're trying to focus very, very nicely, even though mind is going here and there.
When you try to do tapasya, voluntarily accept discomfort, then the misery, the corrective
measure, you were supposed to meet with an accident, you are supposed to meet with some
financial loss, some health reasons, those will not come to your life.
So an intelligent person does rigorous tapasya, and in this way, he avoids material miseries
also.
So that's the sadhana bhakti is very, very important.
It avoids the miseries which are due to come to us as per our destiny, because we have
it anyway, the misery beforehand, and our tendency to enjoy independent of Krishna also
gets corrected.
With this, I would like to end today's session, a little long one.
We may take some questions if anyone has Hare Krishna Prabhu Sandesh Prabhu wants to join,
but it is showing that meeting has been logged by the host.
Can you please check?
Yeah, actually, I log the meetings because I wish that all of you log in on time, join
the meeting on time and chant very nicely and then hear the whole lecture from the beginning.
So this much sincerity is required at least to understand Krishna's instructions.
So please try to come on time.
Does stock market also come under gambling, regulative principles, Prabhu?
Yes, stock market is very, very dangerous that trading.
You can invest in something where the return is assured.
But where the trading is there, intraday trading and all these things, very, very dangerous.
It is gambling we should avoid.
In verse number eight, it has been mentioned that the creation is annihilated by my will.
Does that mean even if everything is planned, if Lord wishes, he can destroy the creation
anytime?
Yes, he can destroy the creation anytime.
But Krishna's planning is perfect.
There are no accidents.
So there is no need to destroy in between then what Pranam Prabhuji, please send the
shloka about that punishment, suffering to sincere devotee.
It is 10.14.
I will write here point eight Shreemad Bhagavatam 10.14.8.
You all can read the translation and explanation.
That is very nice.
Actually many devotees joined on time, but lost connectivity and couldn't join because
meeting was logged.
OK.
Hare Krishna Prabhuji, can you please elaborate upon people in Satva Guna get bored?
OK, so those people who are Satvik, they maintain Satva Guna and do not develop devotion to
Krishna, pure devotion.
They may even be liberated and they may merge in the light which is coming out from the
body of Krishna.
You would have heard many spiritualist tell, we have to become willing in Bhagawan.
So the light coming from Bhagawan, Bhagawan is a light, Bhagawan is not light.
Just like the sun, if you see from naked eyes at the noon time, you may not see the form
of the sun, just bright light.
So when you try to understand God without his himself revealing his form, you may see
only light, which is very, very dazzling.
And then you think God is light.
So a person who is simply Satvik, he may merge in that light which is coming out from
God's body.
But after spending many, many years, long time over there, again he wishes to enjoy
because that is not natural tendency for us.
The soul's natural tendency, soul has got all the senses, is to engage these senses
in the service of Krishna.
Just like a person who is very frustrated, he may want some isolation, go to some lonely
resort or something, but all life he cannot remain alone.
Can fasting solve all problems?
It will solve many problems and fasting for Krishna will solve all the problems.
And we have, but we have to understand what is fasting.
So fasting is not simply done not to eat food on fasting.
A devotee does not take food because yes, one thing is tapasya actually wants to save
time.
There is a lot of time consumed in procuring the food, cooking the food and eating the
food.
At least one or one and a half hours are consumed in taking the food.
He wants to save that time also and engages in service of Krishna.
Thus, on the day of fasting, devotee doesn't want to do any activity, but simply wants
to chant and hear the name.
This is actually fasting.
Simply not eating is not fasting.
So if you are not able to chant or fast, do not do that.
Take something and chant in here.
The main reason is to save time for chanting and hearing.
So morning to evening, we should be simply chanting and hearing.
Do chanting, hearing, Kirtan, read Bhagavatam, read Ramayan, read the pastimes of Lord Ramachandra.
This is what we are supposed to do continuously during the entire fasting, and this will liberate
the living entity.
Hare Krishna, Prabhu, at the beginning, you said that parents are nowadays in Rajasic
mode.
What should we do?
Should we also take that mode?
Yes, you can take that mode and then you will also always remain disturbed.
So what we should do is we should follow the spiritual master nicely and become should
And when we become should the South pick, we become pure devotees, our parents automatically
will become liberated.
Hare Krishna, Prabhu, how to strictly follow rules and regulations.
Sometimes we are motivated, but sometimes we are down, not able to follow and break
them.
What should be done when we are not in devotee association without devotee association is
not possible to follow the rules and regulations.
So we have to design our life in such a way that we always remain in devotee association.
Never be greedy about mundane temporary achievements of life because of which you are supposed
to leave devotee association.
So take some association, speak to some devotees over phone, over internet, do something and
as soon as possible, either try to preach, make your family members devotees, make your
neighbor society devotees.
If you are not able to live with devotees, create devotees around you by distributing
Prabhupada books, requesting people, please chant Hare Krishna, it is very nice process.
There is no harm.
I have got benefited.
You will also get benefit request people and some people will become devotees.
But having devotee association is very important.
Prabhuji, what can be why we are focusing on Bhakti Yoga.
If Karma Yoga also can give us the same benefit, it is by Karma Yoga and Bhakti Yoga, we can
reach on the same perfection.
Why is Srila Prabhupada maximum time quotes Shrimad Bhagavatam?
Why doesn't he guide some other book for Karma Yoga which can advance us in Karma Yoga?
So that is explained in 12th chapter of Bhagavad Gita.
You can read that Karma Yoga is the first step of yoga.
Yoga is a ladder.
So the yoga ladder, yoga means to connect with God.
It begins with Karma Yoga, then it rises to Gyan Yoga.
Then a person rises to Dhyana Yoga and finally reaches Bhakti Yoga.
Unless you become lover of God, where is the question of connecting yourself with God?
So after following Karma Yoga nicely, eventually you have to come to Bhakti Yoga.
So intelligent person directly takes to Bhakti Yoga.
What is the next question?
Could you please share your daily schedule in the monastery?
Thanks.
Our daily schedule is the devotees.
They get up around 3 o'clock to 3.30 in the morning and then 4.15 onwards our sadhana
starts here.
From 4.15 till 9.20, we have our regular morning program, sadhana, which includes Mangala
Aarti, Kirtan, two hours, two and a half hours of chanting and hearing Bhagavatam lecture
and all these things.
And then apart from that, we are supposed to do some swadhyaya reading every day of
Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavatam and other Srila Prabhupada books.
And then we engage in our regular various duties.
Our trees, which were less souls in previous life, different from plants like Tulsi.
Tulsi is liberated soul.
Tulsi has voluntarily taken that form in order to serve Krishna in that way.
Other living entities, they are conditioned.
It is just like the pure devotee may appear like a human being and it may appear that
because of Karma he has come here.
But Srila Prabhupada, all the great Acharyas and Krishna Lord Ramchandra himself, they
appear to be like a human being, but they are not humans.
They are super humans.
They are completely spiritual beings.
So Tulsi is also completely spiritual, although it appears like any other material plant.
What is sadhana?
Somebody is asking sadhana means practicing the process of yoga with a discipline.
So the sadhana which is recommended to us is getting up in the morning, offering Aarti,
chanting the names of God and reading or hearing Bhagavatam every morning.
This is sadhana for us.
Hare Krishna.
How do I know what is the purpose of my birth in this life?
I understand the purpose of Atma is to break the chain of life and death and unite with
Paramatma, but I am given this life.
Is there any other purpose apart from surrendering to Krishna?
No, there is no other purpose apart from surrendering to Krishna.
We had some material desires.
So to fulfill those desires, we have been given such material body, but we should be
wise and not fall for those desires because those desires will give rise to another set
of desires and then we have to take another body.
So the purpose of any body here is to go back to Godhead and stop the process of birth and
death.
Hare Krishna Prabhuji, you said that those who follow the rules and regulations and chant
nicely can attain the association of devotees.
But what about people who donate amount to temples and don't follow the principles or
chant holy name?
Those who follow the rules and regulations and chant nicely can attain the association
of devotees.
But what about people who donate amount to temples and don't follow the principles or
chant the holy name?
So those people who are donating amounts to temples.
So that is also mentioned in the 12th chapter of Bhagavad Gita.
After doing this thing, engaging themselves, Krishna tells the highest stage of consciousness
is always thinking about Krishna remaining absorbed in his thoughts and engaging in his
service 24 hours.
Just like a person when he falls in love, he is always thinking about his or her beloved
in a similar fashion when with that great attachment, it is struggled to forget Krishna
in that consciousness 24 hours devotee is thinking of Krishna.
That is perfection of life that we should do.
But if that is not possible, Krishna tells then you do practice sadhana bhakti, rules
and regulations nicely.
Now if rules and regulations, Krishna is so practical, he tells you whatever is possible
for you, do as per your level.
If sadhana bhakti as you have nicely asked, if a person is not able to follow, then what
he's supposed to do?
Then Krishna tells you work for Krishna by working for Krishna, eventually you'll be
able to follow sadhana bhakti.
Now if there is no opportunity to work for Krishna, then what a person can do.
Then again, there is opportunity.
Then Krishna tells, then if you are not able to work from your working outside, then whatever
results are there of your work you offer to me.
So offering the results of work to Krishna is very, very important.
And suppose one is not able to offer the results of work to Krishna also, because it develops
some require some understanding to offer the results to Krishna.
So simply offer the results to any good activity with that your spiritual life would start.
Spiritual life doesn't start, but a person reaches close to spiritual life.
But he is coming out of these miseries.
At least don't enjoy all the money that you are producing.
Don't start spending your money, because this money doesn't belong to us.
It belongs to Krishna.
This mind and body belongs to Krishna.
Whatever this mind body produces also belongs to Krishna.
So just like a person who is producing some car in a automobile company, he cannot carry
away the car with him.
The skills, the materials have been given by the owner proprietor in a similar fashion,
the skills, the machine, the training has been given by Krishna, how we can enjoy everything
that we produce.
So at least stop enjoying the results of your activities, that is the first step.
You donate for Krishna, donate for something, eventually you will be able to follow sadhana
bhakti.
The more a person gives up the result of his activities, his sadhana improves automatically
and then he attains perfection.
Prabhu, please send the shloka, I have sent the shloka.
Please check 10.14.8 Shrimad Bhagavatam.
Prabhu, how to balance studies and chanting?
I am a student.
Please speak to the devotees whom you are in touch with.
They will give you practical guidance.
What happens when we have negative intention but overcome them and do positive deeds?
That is very good.
You are expanding your freedom in life.
So you have to resist.
Nature will push you, you chant the names of Krishna and resist the negative tendencies.
You will become more free.
Resist next time, you will get more freedom.
In this way, as soon as negative tendencies enter, start chanting the names of Krishna
and resist those tendencies.
Prabhuji, what can be the further scope of COVID-19 on human?
According to Gita COVID-19, nothing special.
Krishna can employ various means to correct the enjoying tendency and to give punishment
to the souls who have done some wrong activity.
So anything can happen that is but complete destruction will not happen.
Nature will continue.
As long as living entities do not surrender to Krishna, how much ever technological scientific
advancement they do, they will not be able to enjoy.
This is what Bhagavad Gita tells.
Lot of learning earned today.
Thank you very much.
Please keep on chanting, doing service nicely and more learning will come.
Prabhuji, can we have Kirtan once in a week?
We miss Kirtan by you since there is lockdown.
Okay, so tomorrow I'll try to sing Kirtan and you can hear it is Lord Ramchandra's appearance
day.
Tomorrow we'll start with Kirtan.
How are trees?
You are done.
Prabhupada says the one who follows regulative principles, develops a material or spiritual
power.
Can you please tell us about it, Prabhu?
Yes.
Anybody who does any kind of tapasya, he develops certain powers here.
That is a fact.
Like Gandhari is a typical example.
How Gandhari is simply because she did tapasya.
I don't want to enjoy the pleasure of seeing things around me.
I would not open my eyes.
When Gandhari became so powerful, when she saw Duryodhana, his entire body became solidified.
Special mystic power she developed.
Similarly, Prabhupada's Mahatma Gandhi, he became so powerful, such an important figure
that he was able to drive away the Britishers because of the power of tapasya, brahmacharya.
Even though he was a family man, from the age of I think 34 years, he started following
brahmacharya, which is so tough, especially in family life.
But because he controlled his senses, thus tapasya, he became powerful.
Earlier kings would rule the entire planet or very, very big empires for hundreds of
years because they were strong.
Now even with great coalition, people are not able to rule a country for a few years
because people are weak, no tapasya.
All fallen souls who want to enjoy without any tapasya.
So tapasya makes a person very, very powerful.
So tapasya is very important.
And tapasya begins with brahmacharya and getting up early in the morning and chanting the names
of Krishna.
So you definitely will become powerful materially and spiritual powers.
All will come by tapasya.
My sister would like to join the session.
Can she be added to this group?
It is not a group like WhatsApp.
I have sent the link.
Anybody can click on the link and join.
All are welcome.
Please forward the link so that others also can take benefit.
Hare Krishna Prabhuji, can you please elaborate upon people in Satguru?
Okay, I've done this.
Hare Krishna Prabhu, yesterday I asked a question, something that is it appropriate and meaningful
to see astrology for marriage?
If you are following the instructions of Krishna perfectly, you have taken deeksha from a pure
devotee spiritual master, there is no need to consider any astrology.
Those people who are perfectly surrendered to the spiritual master, surrendered to Krishna,
their destiny doesn't act upon them.
That is perfectly under control of Krishna.
So those who are initiated, those who are perfectly following the rules and regulations
of Krishna need not consider astrology.
Even the most famous astrologer of our country, you go to him, you try to consult.
If he knows that you are a devotee of Krishna, he will not give any consultation.
He would tell astrology doesn't apply on devotees of Krishna.
And actually he revealed the purpose of all astrology is to make a person surrender to
Krishna because then only can surpass all the influence of stars and past force upon
him.
So those who are completely surrendered to Krishna, no problem at all.
So but if you are not completely surrendered to Krishna, please do consider visiting an
astrologer for marriage.
Hare Krishna Prabhu, okay, this I've done.
Please do not send again and again because some people every 10 minutes are posting
the same questions.
Once if you write, that is enough.
Same questions are coming.
Hare Krishna Prabhuji, please guide on how to offer food to Lord Krishna.
Is there any process?
Yes, there is a process.
You can consult the devotees who are in touch with you and they will guide you how to offer
food.
And these things are also mentioned online.
Offering food.
Hare Krishna is con you, right?
You will get the procedure.
Why we the people are though that everything is mine, like anything's and God Krishna
said that you I don't understand.
I'm sorry.
The language probably should we follow our parents blindly as Lord Rama did?
Very important question.
Should we follow our parents blindly as Lord Rama did?
The parents should be followed by children without any questioning, without any revolt.
That is not the etiquette.
For any superiors, they may be harsh at times, they may be rude at times, they may scold
or correct for no reason.
But the duty, the duty of children is never to revolt, never to oppose and always remain
very obedient and never offend even verbally.
What to speak of physically arguing, which happens now.
But in one situation, when the parents, their instruction is against the instruction of
Krishna or Guru, then their instruction can be left behind.
Typical example is Prahlad Maharaj.
His father, Hirnukashpoo, sent him to a material school.
Although he was not interested, he attained that he went to that school.
Teachers would tell, please repeat the instructions.
He would again repeat the instructions.
But when his father told, do not worship Krishna, he never obeyed his father.
So as long as the instructions of our superiors are not in contradiction with the instructions
of Krishna, Guru, they should be followed as it is.
Whatever they tell, there is no question of saying no, this is the duty.
If you follow this, we'll be happy in this life and next life.
Don't worry.
Oh, my father is less intelligent.
Mother is less intelligent.
This thing, that thing.
Yes, you can consult.
You can try to convince.
But finally, their instruction should always be followed.
Only when they are stopping you from following Krishna consciousness, they should not be
followed.
Hare Krishna.
How do I know what is the purpose of my life?
Purpose is to go back to Godhead.
