So this was the verse we finished last time. Let's read it again today. Very important verse.
So here Krishna is declaring,
These four things you can offer unto me.
Which four things?
Even offers me with love and devotion but
If that is offered with love and devotion, then flower, fruit, water or leaf, Krishna will accept it. These four things.
So some people tell, they give various evidences that
No, your Krishna also was eating non-veg. Why don't you eat non-vegetarian food?
So here we can see that Krishna doesn't mention like that.
So there are so many things that is why we should be careful from where we are receiving the knowledge.
Here Krishna very clearly tells, what does Krishna eat?
So Krishna tells, I eat if you offer me with love these four things.
Pure vegetarian stuff. He doesn't like non-veg.
But why Krishna is telling that I will accept if you offer me?
What will happen if Krishna accepts?
So Krishna explains very nicely in the next shloka, why this prelude is given of this shloka.
So this is called Karma Yoga. The verse we are going to discuss now. Action in Krishna Consciousness.
So we are living in this material world. Stopping the activities is not possible.
So many times people ask that, Prabhu, what do you do entire day?
They wonder that, okay, morning they can do some kirtan, some chanting.
They think entire day we are worshipping in the temple or we are just sitting and singing.
Yes, that is also a very high kind of devotional service.
If you can do it 24 hours, but then people wonder.
So all these devotees 24 hours morning and night they are singing, they are doing bhajans.
What do they do exactly 24 hours?
So actually action, stopping the action, whatever we are doing, some people think that is called sannyas.
Simply sitting in one place and meditating like that.
But stopping the activities is not possible.
And it can be possible at a very, very advanced stage.
Like Haridas Thakuri was standing 24 hours.
But that is not recommended for those who have just started their spiritual life.
Even after considerable time, they are not supposed to.
That is called nirjan bhajan.
Not doing anything but simply singing and hearing the glories of Krishna throughout the day and night.
So for the beginners, Krishna mentions this shloka.
So this process is so nice. You need not leave your work.
But whatever work you are doing, whatever work your mind and body allows,
whatever you are eating,
whatever you offer, whatever you give away, whatever you donate,
Oh son of Kunti, all that you do, all that you eat and all that you offer and give away,
as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as an offering unto me.
So Krishna is telling whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer,
every person has to do some religious rituals, whatever you are offering.
And you are giving away, you are donating something.
And whatever hard work, austerity, penance you are doing, should be done as an offering unto me.
It means all the activities, actions of our life should be offered to Krishna.
Now a person may wonder, oh this is too much.
Whatever I do in my life, whatever I eat, whatever I give,
whatever worship I do, I have to offer, whatever ingredients,
whatever tapasya I do should be only done for Krishna, should be only offered to Krishna.
So this appears to be impractical.
However, why a person is supposed to do all these things?
What is the result he is going to get by all?
So that Krishna again explains in the next verse.
What is the benefit when a person does this?
Krishna explains,
It's a very important word.
Shubh means good and ashubh means bad.
So people tell that they write in their house, especially north, you would find shubh and labh.
And there would be swastika in between.
So they want shubh things to happen, benefit to happen.
But here Krishna is telling,
In this way you will be freed from all the reactions to good and evil deeds.
And by this principle of renunciation, you will be liberated and come to me.
So Krishna is telling not just good things, but you have to be freed from all the,
not just bad things, you have to be freed from the good things as well.
And by this principle of renunciation, you will be liberated and you will come to me.
So this is very important principle.
Krishna is telling,
See, this is real compassion.
This is the aim of life.
So generally people think, let me do good activities.
Let me enjoy life. That is very good.
And those people who promote somebody's enjoyment,
enjoyment means enjoyment of the senses.
That government which promotes enjoyment of the senses,
that is to be taken as something very good.
They are doing good activity.
And anything which stops our enjoyment of senses, which creates hurdle,
that is to be taken as bad activity.
So Arjuna in the beginning of Bhagavad Gita,
actually the beginning of Bhagavad Gita is very, very nice and important.
So Arjuna was supposed to fight with his relatives,
with his very close relatives.
He was supposed to kill his spiritual master.
He was supposed to kill his grandfather, Bheeshma,
who was just like his father, who took care of him very, very nicely.
So what to speak of ordinary violence?
If a person is supposed to kill his own father or grandfather,
it is such a difficult situation.
And Arjuna was put into such situation.
He has to kill all his brothers, all his cousins,
his father, his teacher and mass slaughter.
Crores of people are going to be killed.
Now Arjuna, he is behaving very compassionately.
What is Arjuna telling?
Krishna, simply for my kingdom, I am not so greedy.
Simply for the sake of kingdom, what will happen if we win the war?
We will get the kingdom, we will enjoy.
But simply for our enjoyment, should we put to suffering so many people?
So this appears to be a very nice decision.
Arjuna is experiencing compassion of the heart.
That if I don't fight, soldiers of both the sides,
crores and crores of people would be saved.
And he is giving various logical arguments.
He is telling, first of all, so much killing is involved.
What will happen even if I win this kingdom,
if so many people are killed?
And what is the use if all the elderly persons are killed?
Even if we win the kingdom, there would be no one to guide the younger generation.
So this nuclear family that people have now,
or even nuclear is breaking apart now.
Nuclear fission is happening.
No families practically.
But otherwise the Vedic culture is joint family, big families.
So in that the elderly people are supposed to guide the young people.
They are supposed to be very, very advanced in spiritual life.
And a person who is advanced in spiritual life,
he is supposed to give guidance to younger generation.
So he is respected very much.
That is why these days even respect is not there for the elderly people,
for the parents, for the grandparents.
Because the child asks that why should I respect you?
What you have taught me, earning money?
I can earn more than you.
In the school itself, people, boys are having startups now.
So he is telling father, grandfather, I am earning more than you.
How much you were earning at my age?
So why should I give you any respect?
Why should I listen to you?
So people are not listening.
So it is because all the elderly members are supposed to impart spiritual instructions to them.
So when the elderly members will be killed,
as they have come here to fight on the battlefield,
who will be there to make them understand the highest aim of life?
And thus entire civilization will be brought to ruination.
And all the male members have come here.
If they are all killed, who will protect the women?
Women always need protection because there are always some wrong elements.
If they are not protected, then the situation is very bad,
like it is happening now in the world around us.
So he is giving various reasons that there would be no one to guide the younger generation.
There would be no one to protect the women.
There would be no one to offer Pindas to the forefather.
Pindas to the forefather, it is very important.
If because of excessive attachment, the forefathers have got ghostly bodies,
as we discussed yesterday,
if a person is very much attached to his people, his relatives, his place of residence or work or whatever,
then that soul is not willing to move to another body.
And thus the soul lives in a ghost body.
So in order to relieve such people who have become ghosts,
either because of sinful life or because of worship of ghosts or because of excessive attachment.
So ghost life is very, very bad.
Those people, especially commit suicide, they all become ghosts
because the living entity has been assigned this machine.
The soul has been assigned this machine.
You live in this machine for a certain point of time and living entity out of ignorance.
He thinks I am this body.
I am so much frustrated.
What is the use of living?
There is more misery here than happiness.
So let me finish this body.
I don't want that little happiness which I get, which is but absence of misery.
So let me finish.
So foolish person does not know that only body will be finished.
Machine will be finished.
But the person will remain and the desires will remain with the person.
But there would be no machine to fulfill the desires.
That is why those people who are haunted as I met a person some time back
and he was telling that how one of his family members, they were haunted.
So whenever the ghost would capture, she would eat like anything.
Like a person is mad after eating, just putting food stuffs into mouth
and very, very spicy and this kind of food stuff, which otherwise she would not have.
And then the ghost will go out and then she would be, oh my God, my mouth is burning with chilies.
Please give me some water, some sugar like that.
So it is not her taste to have the chilies.
But ghosts want to enjoy all that chili and pungent thing.
So person eats like anything.
So the ghost, they have the carnal desires, but they do not have body
because they have finished the body.
They have acted against the laws of nature.
So that is why they have to move around in subtle bodies.
And thus they try to capture people who are dirty, who are into intoxication,
who are unclean, stay up at night and depressed and all these things.
Tamsic basically.
Those people who drink and take non-veg, they get easily haunted by the ghosts.
So ghosts are willing to have such bodies so that they can have fulfilled their desires.
So anyway, Arjuna is telling if these people are killed,
then nobody would be there to offer Pinda to the forefathers.
So if the son, grandson or any descendant doesn't offer the Pinda,
this Shraddha ceremony does not happen.
Then the forefathers, they will continue to remain in ghostly species.
That is why people were so very much anxious to have son.
So son is called Putra in Sanskrit.
So Sanskrit is so nice language.
Every word has a meaning.
So why Putra is called Putra?
Because he saves from the hell known as Putra.
Traite means to save.
So the son has the capacity, such is the science,
that he can deliver his forefathers from hellish planets, hellish situations.
If they are being punished or they are in ghostly species.
So this person by offering Shraddha Pinda,
it is nothing but some food which is offered to Vishnu
and the remnants are given to their forefathers.
In this way, they are relieved from the hellish planets.
They are relieved from the ghostly bodies.
That's when people are saying, I do not get any son.
They are very much scared because anytime any mistake can happen,
a person can end up in hellish planets.
So by mistake, if I end up in hellish planet, who will save me if I do not have son?
So people wanted son.
Son, please, God give me son.
They would do Putra Reshti Agnya to have son.
So Arjuna is telling, no Pinda will happen.
It is very, very important to offer Pinda.
Otherwise forefathers will suffer.
We are obliged to forefathers because of them we have got this human body
in which we can make our spiritual life perfect.
So in this way, various arguments are being given by Arjuna.
However, Krishna kept aside all these arguments of compassion,
of nonviolence and this thing and told Arjuna, you fight.
So that is why some people are not able to understand the action of Krishna
because they think and there is one religion which is especially in India.
They have many followers.
So that religion preaches that yes, there have been so far these many Acharyas or preachers in our religion
and Krishna is going to be the next Acharya or preachers and we will worship Krishna.
So if you ask why you do not worship now, if you are going to worship after some time,
so they tell because Krishna committed so much violence on the battlefield of Kurukshetra,
now Krishna has gone for purification in hell.
He is taking punishment for so much violence which he created on Kurukshetra
and so many other killings also Krishna did.
So they tell Krishna is suffering now.
So this is the understanding.
So this is very childish understanding.
So Srila Prabhupada once he was, as we know how Akshaya Patra began,
Srila Prabhupada was in Mayapur.
And in Mayapur devotees would feed prasadam to all the visitors,
all the villagers who would stay near the temple.
And after that visitors would throw away their plates behind the temple, temple building.
And then Prabhupada was there in his quarters.
And suddenly Prabhupada noticed he was hearing some voices.
So Prabhupada went back and saw that there were small children, young children and there were dogs also.
And the children were somehow fighting with their dogs
in order to snatch away those plates in which some remnant prasadam was left behind.
They were so hungry that they have to fight with ferocious dogs, the kids.
So Prabhupada became very, very compassionate.
So he told Krishna is maintaining of everyone.
Krishna is supplying food to everyone.
Nobody should be hungry in our temple.
So Prabhupada told you make sure nobody should go hungry within 10 mile radius of our temple, of our centers.
So that is why this is how we started Akshaya Patra and we started feeding Krishna prasadam to people.
So this is compassion.
And Prabhupada appreciates that compassion is important.
A devotee is having compassion at heart.
A sattvic person will show compassion definitely.
However, there was another instance when Srila Prabhupada would go for walks.
So one such time it was in walk or otherwise.
Prabhupada came across people are playing golf, golf course.
So Prabhupada asked his disciples, what are these people doing?
What is golf?
Golf is like people have a small ball.
They hit it with a club and then they sit in a small this thing.
He gave description.
This is what they do.
And then there were tears in Prabhupada's eyes hearing this description.
When I was in college, so we had unique roommates.
So I would get a four o'clock in the morning and start my sadhana.
And this other fellow, he would come and sleep at four o'clock.
My roommate and there was third fellow also.
So we were discussing what are the future plans.
So he was telling that this fellow, he wants to become filthy rich.
He wants to have a lot of money and have world tour and enjoy like anything and like that.
And I told, so what about you?
What do you wish to do?
He told, no, I am not very much greedy about money.
OK, some little money I need and then I will do some stable job or whatever.
And then I will retire soon and I'll play golf.
So that is to be taken a leisure activity.
Playing golf means a person is having a lot of leisure time.
He will hit the ball ball will go far away.
Then you sit in a small car, search for the ball and then you go.
And then again you hit in this entire day you spend.
So this is supposed to be such nice life.
He's having a lot of money, a lot of comfort.
He doesn't need to attend to his office work for so many hours and a person should be happy.
This is nice life.
But Prabhupada, there were tears in his eyes.
Similarly, in another instance, Srila Prabhupada, when he would go for morning walks.
So once it became a little late for the morning walk and many people were going for the office.
They were walking and the disciples were with Prabhupada.
So the disciple was thinking.
Oh, just see I'm here with such a rare soul of the universe, a pure devotee of Krishna.
A person who has maximum knowledge, who knows absolute truths,
who is having intimate connection with the Supreme Personality.
24 hours he's in touch with Krishna and I am there walking with this personality.
How nice it is.
And he was seeing just see these people, foolish people.
They are going to office.
And then he looked towards Prabhupada, how Prabhupada is looking towards these people.
And then again, there were tears in the eyes of Prabhupada.
Prabhupada was crying.
So why Prabhupada is crying seeing somebody going to office?
Why Prabhupada is crying?
Playing them golf course, playing them golf around golf course.
At the same time, he is crying, seeing the material miserable situation also that children are hungry.
So why Prabhupada is crying?
What is the actual cause of his misery?
What does he see so that he feels compassion?
And how is it different from Arjuna who was told not to show compassion?
Prabhupada explains material compassion, lamentation and tears are the signs of ignorance of this self.
Material compassion, lamentation and tears.
If a person is crying seeing the other person,
if a person is feeling compassion for the other person,
if the person is having tears in eyes seeing other person,
it does not necessarily mean that the person is in knowledge.
It means the person is in ignorance if that is on material platform.
So there is a very nice shloka in this connection of Prahlad Maharaj.
So Prahlad Maharaj, when he was greatly tortured by his father,
Hiranyakashipu, who was the first demons of the universe.
So Prahlad Maharaj, after such a great torture, nobody would have had such torture from his father.
His father was trying to kill him every other day, putting him under snakes,
putting him in boiling oil, putting him in a hailstorm,
putting him under the feet of elephant, throwing him from the mountain top.
He even forced mother of Prahlad Maharaj to administer poison to Prahlad.
So much torture he had.
He tried, he told his servants to kill him using various weapons, but everything failed.
So after all this torture, finally Lord Narasimhadev appeared.
When Hiranyakashipu himself personally was going to kill Prahlad,
he came and he killed Hiranyakashipu.
And Prahlad Maharaj, then Narasimhadev told,
So what do you want from me? You want material powers?
You want to come, you please come with me back to Godhead?
You want liberation?
So Prahlad Maharaj told.
Very nice shloka it is from the 7th canto of Bhagavatam.
So Prahlad Maharaj, small boy, he is speaking.
He is telling,
I am not scared of all the miseries of this material world.
This material world is full of miseries.
And we are practically in the midst of misery.
Apart from this also, there are miseries after miseries.
There is misery of repeated death.
You keep on dying over and over again.
There is death of relatives, the people you love.
There is separation, there is disease.
So world is full of miseries.
But he is telling,
I am not at all scared of the miseries of this material world.
Why I am not scared?
Because his father, just imagine if somebody puts you in boiling oil.
What would be our situation?
It is so horrible.
If somebody throws us from mountain top, very dangerous situation.
So why despite being put in so many dangerous situations,
always he is trying, somebody is trying to kill him.
He is telling, I am not at all disturbed.
Why he is not at all disturbed?
So Prahlad Maharaj reveals a secret here.
He tells,
Because I am always engaged in
means my heart, my consciousness, my mind.
Because my mind is always absorbed in singing, chanting your glories.
So you will see various people, you read any Vedas.
People are offering various prayers for Krishna.
They are glorifying Krishna.
Krishna is so nice.
So Brahma is glorifying.
Each limb of your body can do action of any other limb.
You are tending cows, desire fulfilling cows in the spiritual world.
And in this way, he is being glorified by various prayers.
So Prahlad Maharaj is telling, I have learned the art, how to always glorify you.
And because my mind is always absorbed in glorifying you, singing prayers for you.
So some people tell, just like what was that movie?
PK or Oh My God, some movie was there.
I don't remember correctly.
So usually we do not watch movies.
It is time wastage and full of lust and this thing.
But nevertheless, after joining temple,
we were forced to see these two movies because they created a lot of turmoil.
And then people started becoming atheist.
So one such argument was, long back I saw.
I don't even, I did see just a few clips of it.
So the argument put forth was, why you are chanting this God's name always?
So he told, no, because God is our father.
Does any father tell like that?
You sit and chant, Papa, Papa, Papa.
So what are you doing by chanting here?
So it is useless activity.
So these are foolish people.
They do not understand.
So Prahlad Maharaj tells, they do not know what is the pleasure that a person gets when he is chanting the names of God,
when he is glorifying God.
As soon as you glorify, simply glorify God.
Offering prayers to God immediately raises a person to the level of spiritual bliss, spiritual ecstasy.
Thus, Akrura, he became perfect in his spiritual life simply by offering prayers to Krishna.
There are nine processes of Bhakti Yoga, spiritual perfection.
So one of them is Vandanam, simply offering prayers.
Read the prayers of wonderful devotees in the name of Lord Krishna.
There are nine processes of Bhakti Yoga, spiritual perfection.
One of them is Vandanam, simply offering prayers.
Read the prayers of wonderful devotees in Bhagavatam, in other scriptures,
and simply keep on chanting, chanting in front of Krishna.
So this is also one of the processes of Bhakti Yoga.
So Prahlad Maharaj is telling, because I am always engaged in chanting your glories,
Mahamritamagnachitta, my mind is absorbed in this.
Amrit means nectar.
It is very, very tasty.
So the pleasure which I get in chanting your glories is like Mahamrit.
It is great nectar.
So I am getting such an amazing nectar that I am not affected practically by any of the disturbances of material world.
And Prahlad Maharaj practically showed that.
Just imagine, boiling oil had no effect on his body.
All the material disturbances, he drank poison also, thinking it is prasadam of Krishna.
So whatever is coming to me, it is coming by Krishna's arrangement.
So Prahlad Maharaj, he took poison also, thinking it is prasadam of Krishna,
and it became nectar actually, did not have any effect upon this body.
So this is but very high stage of spiritual life.
And Prahlad Maharaj tells, it takes many, many lifetimes to have such rapt attention upon Krishna.
But when a person is having such rapt attention upon Krishna,
then ethereal changes of the nature around him do not affect such a person.
So human life is meant to aspire to reach such a platform.
What to speak of corona, even poison will not have any effect upon us.
So Prahlad is telling, because I am always engaged in chanting your glories, I am having this pleasure.
Then why we don't feel such pleasure when we chant the names of Krishna?
We think, he is not stopping at all.
What happened?
So because, Prabhupada explains many times, we are sick now.
We are having disease of bodily conception of life.
Just like a person hallucinates in dream thinking I am somebody,
I am under disease thinking I am man, I am woman.
This is diseased condition, bodily concept of life.
And forgetfulness of one's own form, one's original identity, spiritual identity.
This is disease.
Just like an Alzheimer's patient forgets his original identity and remembers only his temporary identity.
Similarly, as soon as soul takes up a body in this material world,
it forgets all the previous temporary and its eternal identity also.
So this is a diseased situation.
So in diseased situation, a person will not be able to enjoy the nectar of life.
Just like a sick person cannot relish, a jaundice person cannot relish sugar candy.
Although eating sugar candy, papaya and all sugar cane juice, that is the only remedy.
But he will find it bitter, a person who has jaundice.
So that is why initially we have to simply hear, hear, hear with great attention
and slowly we will be able to come to that platform of perfection, of relishing these names.
So Prahlad Maharaj is telling, I am not at all disturbed by all these things.
However, I have one disturbance in life.
Oh, one disturbance is there.
None of the things of this material world could disturb.
What is that thing which is disturbing Prahlad?
So he tells,
Soche means lamentation.
A devotee does not lament for anything on the material platform.
Somebody is taking birth, somebody is dying.
So entire material conditioning for a devotee is miserable.
So that is why a devotee does not worry about these things.
But devotee is very much concerned.
For what?
Just for the purpose of enjoying the senses.
These people are working very hard day and night and thus increasing their miseries of life.
So some people think that okay, we should not punish other living entities.
We should not harm the other living entities.
Some people ask, what is the use of following spiritual life?
Just be a good person.
What is the use of reading Bhagavad Gita and this thing?
Because I lead a very good life.
I don't harm any living entity.
I don't commit violence.
I don't do this thing.
And I'm just having a good life.
So what is the harm in this?
So Srila Prabhupada explains.
Just like some people are there, they work for animal welfare.
And they tell you should not, don't take, don't use the animals for anything.
Don't sit upon the animals.
Don't ride on horseback.
Don't use ox for farming.
Don't use camels for riding.
Don't use cow's milk for drinking.
Do not put animals into trouble.
Don't take any service from them.
However, they do not know this entire violence upon animals is happening because we stop taking their service.
Because we stopped using cows in the farms.
Now cows are being sent to slaughterhouse.
There is no option to use cows.
Because we stopped using oxes in the, what do we call, oil mill.
The ox would move around and then they would press the castor seeds and oil would come out.
But now because we stopped using, taking the use of oxen, then what is happening?
We have, but no use, but to kill the ox.
Similarly in Australia, so many camels.
They have invented modern transport.
They don't want to trouble the animals.
So there is no solution.
Australian government, whenever camels gather in good number, they assemble them and then kill them from the helicopters.
So they don't understand.
Materially also, if you don't put the animals in proper use, then they will but be killed.
So actually you are harming the animals.
You are the cause of their death.
And another perspective is the animal when the cow's milk is offered to Krishna.
So here Krishna is telling whatever offer, whatever work you do, whatever you produce, you offer it to me.
So a cow, the result of cow's activity is milk.
And that milk, if it is offered to Krishna, cow is also performing yoga.
This process is so nice.
When Prabhupada saw two bulls, they were pulling a cart in which Gaur Nithai were there.
The deities of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and Nithyananda Prabhu.
And they would go around the town and do book distribution and do Kirtan with Gaur Nithai sitting in the cart, bullock cart.
And when Prabhupada saw the two bulls, he became very happy and Prabhupada patted.
And then he told, these bulls, they are carrying Gaur Nithai.
They are not going to return to this material world.
They are going back home, back to Godhead.
So this process is so nice.
Krishna is telling here, all your works you do for me, all tapasya, hard work you do for me.
The results of your work, you offer it to me.
And just see an animal is being given that opportunity to do that work for Krishna.
So this bhakti yoga is so sublime, even an animal can perform and attain perfection of life.
So actually a person who is telling, don't use animals, he is giving material benefit to the animal,
but he does not know if that animal is used in the service of a person
and the person is supposed to follow the instruction of Brahmana,
who will engage him in devotional service that animal is automatically advancing also in spiritual life.
Thus, Krishna has very intelligently designed the entire system very, very nicely.
So so-called people who tell, I do not harm anyone, but I am just doing welfare.
I am making people happy. I have made Facebook and people are enjoying.
I have invented apps like Zomato and whatever and people are enjoying the food is reaching their place.
So actually these people are committing violence.
Sense enjoyment is violence.
Because as soon as you do sense enjoyment, you are creating your new material body.
If you are doing good work, that is violence.
People do not know.
If you are doing philanthropy, that is also violence.
So mundane philanthropy, mundane altruism, in these things, people think that they are doing a compassionate task,
not knowing in ignorance that material condition of the world cannot be changed
by how much ever hard work you do to elevate the situation of the life materially.
Just like if a person commits crime here,
no power can stop him from being punished by the law, from being punished by government.
If a person has killed, he has to be hanged, put behind the bars.
Who can save him?
Similarly, materially happiness and distress is designed for us as per our previous lives
by taking to mundane philanthropy, altruism, social service.
You are not doing any benefit to other living entity.
You are not doing any benefit, zero benefit to other living entity.
These people do not realize.
This benefit is like a person is there sitting in the jail,
and then you are thinking this person is suffering, come tonight I will rescue you from the jail.
So material happiness and distress, it is planned by Krishna.
This point is very important for us to understand.
Then what should we do if a person is hungry?
Should we not give him food?
No, you give him food, but give him Krishna prasadam.
Whatever you give away, offer it to me.
So if you want to give food to other person, you please give him prasadam of Krishna, no problem.
So this is very important.
So because materially you cannot change anybody's destiny.
You cannot help the people around you.
You cannot help your friends.
You cannot help your relatives.
You cannot help even yourself materially by working hard.
You cannot change your destiny.
Happiness and distress is fixed.
So that is why what is violence?
So violence, Srila Prabhupada describes, Shrimad Bhagavad Gita describes,
not preaching Krishna consciousness is violence.
Just like Bali Maharaj, some people tell that why Krishna cheated Bali Maharaj?
Why Krishna cheated Barbarik?
But actually that is not cheating.
That we don't realize, but Bali Maharaj realized who was cheated by Krishna.
So by cheating, Krishna took entire property of Bali Maharaj.
So Bali Maharaj, because he was a pure devotee of Krishna, he told Krishna,
you are actually merciful to us.
And you are, apparently people think that you are enemy of the demons
and you are favorable to the demigods.
But actually you are favorable, you are friend of the demons
because you keep on taking away our property.
And thus we realize this material world is temporary and we come to our senses.
And then we can think about self-realization.
And actually you are doing a disfavor to the demigods by offering them all material opulences.
That is how Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, once when he was visited by a Pandit, by a Brahmana,
he served him very very nicely.
So he became very happy by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's service.
And then he gave me a benediction.
You know, whenever, what is a benediction?
In north they give,
doodho nahao pooto phalo.
You have many many children and have great very happy household life.
This is what they tell.
But when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, he was also offered the same benediction,
You have served me so nicely.
May you have a very happy household life.
As soon as Chaitanya Mahaprabhu heard this,
he closed his eyes and he started shouting, chanting,
No, no, what have you said?
Happy household life.
So Brahmana became, you are, you are insulting me.
I am offering benediction.
You're not taking.
Okay, I tell you, you will never be happy in your household life.
Then Mahaprabhu told, oh, that is very nice.
That is good.
So people do not know if you engage a person in material sense enjoyment,
it is like feeding a person who is sitting on the railway track.
He will keep on sitting.
Train will come and kill the railway person on the railway track.
Don't supply any facilities.
Let the person get up and run from the track.
So thus it is a great favor.
It is only favor if you preach a person Krishna Consciousness.
If you are not preaching Krishna Consciousness,
we are putting the person to death.
So those people who are working hard for people welfare,
human welfare or animal welfare,
they do not know what is real welfare actually.
But yes, these things are also recommended in the Vedas.
You do altruism, you do philanthropy,
nationalism, serve the country, serve the people,
because other people are not going to be benefited.
Their benefit or loss is fixed as per their karmas,
but your heart will become purified.
Although you are practically doing nothing for their benefit,
but your heart is getting purified.
At least you have stopped thinking just your benefit.
So this is the benefit of social service.
This is the benefit of opening hospitals,
doing mundane charity and other things.
They are recommended so that our heart can become cleansed.
Our heart can become pure.
That definitely will happen by all these things.
And one day a person will understand Krishna Consciousness.
Oh, I am trying to save the animal,
but who is becoming animal?
This human being, he performs, lives like an animal.
So he is becoming an animal.
So if I preach Krishna Consciousness,
give some prasadam to this living entity,
once if he chants the name of Krishna, he will not become animal.
So that is real welfare.
Stop him from becoming animal.
Stop him from eternal death.
So this is real seva.
So thus it is very, very important to understand this concept of life,
that a devotee should have compassion for the soul.
And compassion for the soul can mean killing of the body also at time.
So Krishna, when he killed crores of people on the battlefield of Kurukshetra,
it was compassion because all these people went back to Godhead.
They got Swaroop Siddhi.
They got liberation.
Those people who are seeing Krishna appreciated and dying,
others also, they got liberated.
But everyone, those who died,
they got liberation on the battlefield of Kurukshetra.
So death anyway has to happen.
But if they die in Krishna's presence,
they all get liberated.
Bali Maharaj became glorified
when he lost everything to Krishna.
It was not violence from Krishna.
When Barbarik offered his head to Krishna,
it was not violence.
Now he is worshipped as Khatu Shyamji everywhere.
He is worshipped as good as Krishna.
He is considered Krishna only.
So his devotee is always eternally worshipped now.
Death anyway has to happen.
But this is great mercy of Krishna.
So that is why we should not see compassion for this dress as compassion for the living entity.
So ultimately we should see what is saving the soul.
If saving the dress is saving the soul, we should save.
If harming the dress is saving the soul,
harming the dress is also violence,
as it happened on the battlefield.
So this is the difference between material and spiritual compassion.
So this is what we are able to develop.
We should not be attached to good activities,
and we should not do bad activities also.
That is why so-called good activities are also bad as we discussed
because they don't stop your death.
But when you engage in Krishna consciousness,
in this shloka, Krishna told,
vimuktaha, a person becomes liberated
when he offers everything to Krishna,
his tapasya, his money, his activities,
if everything is his food,
if everything is offered to Krishna,
then he becomes free from birth and death,
and mam upaisyasi, he comes to Krishna.
Thus this is real work.
This is actual good work because the death of a person is stopped.
This is the cause of nature.
Don't put him under more deaths.
So this is actual compassion as per Bhagavad Gita.
So please try to spread this knowledge to others.
If you are not spreading this knowledge,
then we are actually committing violence to other living entities.
Don't make sense enjoyment as the aim of life.
That is greatest violence.
If you enjoy the senses, we are creating more bodies for us
because basis our desires, nature will give us more bodies.
So simply try to satisfy the senses of Krishna.
Like Prahlad Maharaj,
our life will automatically be full of unlimited satisfaction.
We just need to wait and follow the instructions
as per the spiritual master very, very nicely.
So we will finish now.
Any questions?
So we will chant Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
There are OK.
Some questions are there.
So others, they can please carry on.
I will take you questions and we will do chanting before we close.
Hare Krishna Prabhu,
Hare Krishna Prabhu,
if we don't get fresh basil leaf under any circumstances,
can we worship Krishna with dry basil leaf?
Yes, you can do that also.
Hare Krishna Prabhuji,
how can one become Krishna conscious in family life?
How to continue chanting 16 rounds every day in family life by doing office work also?
You choose your office work in such a way that we are able to get time for 16 rounds.
So many people, the Brahmacharis are very less.
Most of you are in offices
and many of you are able to follow in your job, in your business.
So people are very, very successful.
Rather, when a person follows Krishna consciousness,
Krishna takes care of his material life also very, very easily.
So just take out time for chanting 16 rounds,
whether your household or otherwise.
If you have any specific difficulty,
you can talk to the preacher who is in touch with you.
Why should Lord Krishna give us forgetfulness?
If you are aware of our past life's misdeeds,
we would definitely refrain from committing those sins, right?
Lord Krishna does not want to put us into forgetfulness.
Lord Krishna or Lord Brahma,
who has been given charge to create this forgetfulness of the living entity,
when he created these things, forgetfulness and other hallucinations,
he became very sad.
What have I created?
I have created such confusion for the living entity,
but it is the desire of living entity to forget.
Why people drink?
Because they want to forget reality.
Why people watch movies?
Because they want to forget this world is so boring.
They want to...
Why people read fiction?
They want to forget this world.
So a person who is enjoying in life,
he will not go for these things.
So only when the life is boring,
people resort to all these things.
So because we want forgetfulness,
we want illusion Krishna creates.
As soon as you desire, I want to see truth.
I want to know truth.
I can sacrifice anything for seeing truth.
Everything will be revealed to us.
Because there is sinful tendency in the heart,
we want to commit.
Krishna facilitates.
Can a married woman get moksha?
And if yes, then how?
Yes, we are going to finish this chapter,
and that shloka is also going to come very soon.
Krishna tells,
So a man, woman, married, unmarried,
anybody, as we discussed today, even animal,
if he takes specifically shelter of Krishna,
they all can get liberation.
How philanthropic activity is violence?
I accept it is not good,
but saying it as violence is indigestible.
So Chanchalapati Prabhu gave this example.
He went to a hospital,
very famous hospital of Jaipur, cancer hospital.
And he went to the cancer patients ward,
and those who are going to die soon.
And he goes there and finds nobody.
So he was imagining these people would be very sad,
and I will preach them maybe Krishna consciousness,
something he was planning,
and then suddenly sees nobody.
And then he asked,
Where are all these people, cancer patients who are going to die?
And then the in charge of hospital,
he told, actually, we have taken to another room, TV room.
We have arranged very nice television where they can watch cricket match very nicely.
So all of them are watching cricket over there in the other room.
So all the cancer patients, they are watching cricket.
And by watching cricket, what is happening?
They are creating more material desires.
So more material desires mean in next life,
they will take birth around cricket stadium.
If they have sufficient credit to take birth as human being.
And the entire life, they'll be watching cricket,
or they would become a sweeper or a pitch cleaner, pitch maker.
And they'll watch cricket very, very nicely.
Entire life work in the stadium.
So in this manner,
whatever we think at the time of death,
we will attain the same state without fail.
So if you're feeding sense grat, philanthropy,
as if the basic needs when body and soul are going to separate,
you fulfill that.
That is OK.
That much is required.
But since enjoyment over indulgence,
that is violence for the living entity,
enjoyment of the senses, eating,
when you eat, you will feel enjoyment.
But enjoyment is allowed only to the point of keeping body and soul together.
As soon as you engage in indulgence,
then you are creating new material bodies.
And creating new material body means immediately,
at least one birth and death is fixed.
Immediately, at least one.
So thus, you have prepared next death for that person.
So is that not violence?
So philanthropy is like,
we cut a goat.
So how do we cut it?
We wash it,
adorn it with garlands,
feed it with sweets,
apply tilak.
And the goat thinks,
wow, so nice.
Just see,
they are worshipping me.
It looks like I've become God.
But why are they worshipping the poor goat?
Because they want to kill it.
They want to slaughter it.
So this is called material compassion.
So material philanthropy, altruism,
means giving a garland to the goat,
which anyway is going to be killed.
Otherwise, the goat would have run away
because you started feeding the goat,
the goat stayed back.
And now the goat is going to be killed.
So this philanthropy,
in which people give overindulgence to other people,
and then in the same hospital,
they also told one fantastic thing.
And apart from this,
Swamiji, you know,
although it is costly,
but we are giving them meat to eat
so that they can be very happy.
They die happily.
All their desires are fulfilled.
So that poor person,
even though he could not be very simple,
before he dies,
they will make sure he should go to hell directly
from this hospital.
So now he's suffering from cancer.
Now he should be boiled in oil in the hell
by the Yamdutas.
So thus material philanthropy is
sometimes violence in this case.
But a person who has eyes,
he will see it.
How can we increase our faith in Krishna?
By associating with devotees
and in their association,
engaging in service of Krishna
by chanting His names.
In this way, we can increase the faith.
Unless we engage in service of Krishna
in association of devotees,
whatever little faith we have,
that also will go away.
Prabhu, why should we do bhakti and worship Krishna?
Do you think it is very easy to understand Krishna
because He is beyond our perception?
Is there anyone who understood Him properly?
Even Brahma didn't.
We should not simply give our life.
It is very rare.
We should not worry about our birth and death.
Just work for humanity. That is perfect.
Even after accepting Krishna,
it is necessary to worship.
Please explain.
I think you missed today's class
because I just explained everything here nicely.
I have to repeat the entire class
if I have to answer again.
So maybe you can ask the devotee
whom you are in touch with
and he will explain you.
What is service of humanity?
Human life is a loophole
from this loop of repeated birth and death.
So when a person worships Krishna,
he becomes freed from birth and death.
Krishna has all the money.
Krishna is very rich and we are sons of Krishna.
So Prabhupada tells the example
that a person, son of a rich man,
is loitering on the street.
You may give him ten rupees out of compassion.
What is better?
Giving him ten rupees to eat some bread
or taking him back to his father?
So that is why taking the living entities
back to Krishna, stopping their death.
That is real service.
Service to humanity is foolish.
What person will serve humanity?
You serve him, how we can serve?
Can we stop somebody's death?
Can we stop diseases?
Can we stop old age?
What service we are doing?
And we cannot serve
because the person is supposed to enjoy
or suffer as per his karma.
So worshipping Krishna is the only solution.
When a person worships Krishna,
he can re-stage like Prahalad Maharaj,
which only in human form we can attain,
completely undisturbed by the changes
of matter around him.
And so many people,
they have attained Krishna consciousness,
especially in our country.
And we have our spiritual master,
our spiritual master,
Srila Prabhupada,
and so many,
hundreds and thousands of devotees,
especially from Lord Shatanya's time,
he created Bhakti movement in India.
You come to us on trips,
we will show you all those places,
all those great devotees
who understood perfectly.
A small request from my friends
and some of the parents request,
those who watched last sessions with me,
requesting your help to know the Gita
and to learn the Gita from Chapter 1
to the last chapter
because they are native here in Telangana state
and earlier I used to stay in Mumbai,
I joined many sessions conducted in Airoli.
Now past one month lost the job
and was here in native place
and can't able to attend sessions in Airoli.
If you don't mind,
can you conduct the sessions online
even though after the corona pandemic?
Yes, we will definitely try to arrange something.
And otherwise,
we have already covered entire Bhagavad Gita
that is available on our website,
HKM Mumbai.
And all those sessions,
most of the sessions are taken by
His grace Amitasana Prabhu.
So if you want to,
but there were six chapters onwards.
So if you want to hear a lecture
of six chapters onwards,
you can visit HKM Mumbai YouTube channel,
Hare Krishna Movement Mumbai,
HKM Mumbai.
And on that YouTube channel,
you will find all the Bhagavad Gita lectures
sequentially, Shloka by Shloka.
And otherwise Srila Prabhupada also has spoken,
Srila Prabhupada Vani.
I will type here, you can visit.
Srila Prabhupadavani.org, you can visit.
On this website,
you will find Srila Prabhupada lectures on
Bhagavad Gita, on Bhagavatam, Chaitanya Charita Amrita,
and you can hear them in sequence.
And we will also continue these sessions,
never mind.
Why people didn't want daughter?
What is the value of daughter?
Daughter is also very, very valuable.
Just like a son can save
a person from hell
by offering Shraddha,
daughter is supposed to be offered to
the groom in Kanyadaan.
So Kanyadaan is a very, very
great charity. Now this
people are having other so-called relationships
or court marriage and all.
Thus people are again committing
violence. The daughter is committing violence
if she does not perform right marriage
as per the Vedas.
Because Kanyadaan, what is
this Kanyadaan? Daughter is offered
in charity. Whenever you give
charity, that is a very great act and their
purifies are hard. But when you offer
your daughter, entire life
you have invested your time, energy,
and you have raised a person with all love, affection
and resources. And that person
you are offering to somebody, so that is
a very great charity. So even
though that person was supposed to go to hell,
a person can become completely freed
from all those sinful lives
and can be promoted directly to heaven by doing
Kanyadaan. So in this way,
daughter also can deliver her father
if this proper Vedic process is
followed. Thus Veda is very, very important.
This is user manual for our life.
And in Krishna Consciousness,
son, daughter or anybody
can deliver their entire family,
relatives, father side, mother side
from the clutches of material
existence. In Krishna Consciousness
it is not limited to son only.
Everyone can do that.
In spiritual life, should we follow our intuitions
or not? You should follow
spiritual master very, very strictly.
Our intuitions may be wrong, especially
when we are under three modes of nature.
However, when you do not have anybody
to consult, some
live action has to be taken. You can
request spiritual master and Paramatma sitting
in your heart intensely, please guide
me and then follow the intuition.
But otherwise, our life
should be guided very, very strictly
as per the guidance
of spiritual master. Whatever it is,
that way we should follow.
Prabhuji, we wanted to see
incarnation videos which
you are supposed to share at Jigyasapavai.
Videos I cannot share here.
The bandwidth doesn't allow. Maybe
when we start our offline sessions, I will share.
Or I will share some links maybe.
I will try to find and share.
Prabhu, can we activate our 108
chakras by chanting Mahamantra?
You can activate any chakra.
I do not know 108. Few 6-7 chakras
are there.
But by chanting, even if you
activate your chakra when the body is
finished, all chakras will get deactivated
and we will move to another machine.
So why you want to elevate,
activate chakra? Maybe you can fly in the air.
You can go to other planet.
But you will suffer.
Now in our car we are suffering,
then flying we will suffer in space.
Miseries of life will not go away.
So that is why chanting should not be used for material
enjoyment. Chanting should only
be used for satisfaction of Krishna.
Devotee stops being selfish and
only wants to serve Krishna.
This is the way of getting maximum happiness in life.
If in this material world,
only girl child, they didn't get
liberation, only putra will get
liberation. If in this material world,
only four fathers, if only girl child,
what we have to do?
So that is why I told Krishna Consciousness.
Hare ranaam eva kevalam kalau naaste avgatran anitha
Chanting holy names, Krishna Consciousness is the way.
As I just told,
girl child or boy child,
anybody who takes to Krishna Consciousness,
his or her parents, father side,
mother side, previous descendants,
upcoming, previous generation,
upcoming descendants, all will be liberated.
So in Krishna Consciousness,
no matter man or woman, anybody who
surrenders to Krishna, follows rules
and regulations nicely, he will
liberate himself and entire family.
Army person who serve in remote
area, circumstances,
they have to eat meat.
So what should they do?
Try to avoid as far as possible.
Even though a person is in
army or other places, you can
pack lunch or this thing.
You can try to survive on
some fruits like that.
But suppose, if at all,
you are going to die,
for survival, a person can take to this
resort, but not otherwise.
We should do go seva,
but the soul of that cow is
fallen. Thus, it has got the
material body. So worshipping that
cow may also make us
degrade in our spiritual life.
So, Prabhupada explains that
cow, we are not
worshipping cow, we are not worshipping any
animal for that matter.
The sentiment is so fine of
this human civilization, just a
moment. So the sentiment
is so fine in human civilization
because we are having milk from
the cow. So that is why
the cow is given the position of
mother. Just like
if any woman raises a person,
even though she
may not be biological mother,
foster father or mother,
but still she would give the same respect.
Just like Krishna, give respect,
rather more respect and love to
Yashoda than Devaki,
because she is doing all the task of mother.
And one very important task of mother
is to give milk. So if that
animal is giving milk, the
sentiments of a person brought up in
Vedic culture are so fine that
even cow is considered mother.
That is why people worship cow, so
it doesn't degrade people.
Prabhuji, have Lord Krishna
stated anything
about pin ceremony for
a person after death? Yes.
So this description is given. That pin is very
important as we discussed in today's session. I explained.
What if a person born in
other caste and is not eligible
and good enough to perform the duties of
that caste? So is it still
supposed to do that work?
There is no caste in Kalyoga.
Every person
is born as Shudra and they degrade
to become Chandalas and Malichas and
all. They even go less than Shudra.
So people are less than Shudras,
Shudras add best their Shudras in Kalyoga.
So Kalyoga, there is no caste.
So what they have to follow is just Krishna
consciousness. That is only possible duty.
If all people started spirituality
and commit not
to marry, then where women
will and how Srishti
works? Okay.
Ajay is asking what will happen.
So if everyone
follows spiritual life and they don't marry,
what will happen to many, many women in
the society? So that
is why in the Vedic culture, a man
was allowed to have more than one wife.
But he should be able to maintain the
wives. And don't worry, in Kalyoga
it is not possible.
Becoming Brahmachari or Sannyasi
is very, very difficult. Thus we
also do not recommend. Only when
we find a person is very, very sincere,
very serious about spiritual life,
then only he is taken. For the last
four years we are preaching in Mumbai,
a single person has not become Brahmachari.
So not easy, very difficult.
Now just like everyone knows
UPSC is best exam, IAS
is very nice job. But then who
can become that? Not easy. So thus
not everyone can reach to the stage of
Brahmachari and Sannyasi. But still
it is recommended, the highest platform.
So don't worry, others will not be able to
follow and women would be taken care.
Hare Krishna.
Prabhu, aaj ka preach very, very nice.
Thank you so much. Prabhu, question is
spiritual master Prabhupada says,
once taken deeksha,
one is sure to go back to Godhead.
Some person saying if joining KC easily
go to Godhead, which statement is
correct? Joining KC means taking
deeksha. Following Krishna Consciousness
means Adhava Guruvashrayam.
Saddharma prichhat.
One has to follow Krishna Consciousness
under direction of Guru. Otherwise chanting
of Hare Krishna Maha Mantra also
will not bring the desired result.
Chapter 13 of Shrimad Bhagavad Gita
says, for complete understanding,
spiritual master's help is needed,
which I too have realized.
So my request for the same
for Chapter 13 as per your
convenience. So I don't understand
the question here.
Yes, spiritual master's help is required.
So please take shelter of Srila Prabhupada,
read his books, hear his lectures.
If you can put faith in him, then please
accept him as your spiritual master.
How to surrender each and every activity?
So the greatest degree of surrender
is doing that activity
under the direction of Krishna or his
representatives, his devotees.
If you cannot do that, then whatever
activity as we discussed in the Shloka today
you are doing, offer the result of that
activity to Krishna.
And how to offer to Krishna? Offering to
Krishna means engaging in his mission,
engaging in Krishna Consciousness movement.
Those people who are spreading the message
of Lord Krishna, all the activity
should be used to
further this mission. What is
future? I am in confusion.
Please solution my problem. I can't take
decision particularly. Once
one can take decision, I
can't follow that one. Please suggest
me. You cannot take decisions.
So simply try to
follow one's spiritual authority.
You can contact the
devotee whom you are in touch with. And
as the devotees guide you, just
take that decision. That decision is best for
you. So confusion over. Don't
think what will bring you profit, what will bring you
loss. Following the devotees very
very nicely will bring best in
our life, now and in future.
