So we saw in the previous session that spiritual life, especially when we are new into it.
So people tell why have you taken to spiritual life when we ask what is the motive? What is the purpose?
So purpose is to have peace. If I follow this thing, then mine will be peaceful and I'll be able to have work life balance.
And it is so nice. But the Vedas present a very unique situation for an aspiring spiritualist.
The Vedas tell actually spiritual life is declaration of a war against the illusory energy of God.
So can there be peace in war? So we think spiritual life is peace.
But actually spiritual life means declaration of war against the illusory energy of God.
And when we are in war, so there would be some attacks. Enemies always trying to capture, always trying to attack us.
Similarly, Srila Prabhupada tells our enemy is very, very dangerous.
Usually a person does very nice fortification when he is in war.
You have big, big forts in country you would have seen, especially in Rajasthan we have and Maharashtra we have Shivaji's fort.
Everywhere you have some forts and very tall and strong walls so that enemy cannot attack.
So Krishna explains to Arjuna, this enemy, this Maya, this illusion, which attacks us in the form of lust.
Where does it live actually? What are the sitting places of this enemy?
In a war, it is very, very important to understand where is the enemy sitting.
Then only we can attack the enemy, kill the enemy or at least protect ourselves.
Don't enter that area. Enemy sitting over there. So where is this enemy sitting?
Where is this illusion called Maya which is sitting, which is creating so much trouble for us?
And thus perpetually we are being killed life after life after life in the illusion that I am man, I am dog, I am cat, I am old, I am young, I am woman, I am intelligent,
I am dull, all these illusions. This house is mine, this city is mine, this country is mine, this planet is mine.
All these illusions, they haunt us because of a special energy created by Maya.
So where is this enemy sitting? So it is told the sitting places of this enemy are it is sitting on our senses,
it is sitting in the mind and it is sitting in our intelligence. Oh my God!
Enemy has captured my mind also, my intelligence also and my senses also.
So I am completely controlled by enemy. So the situation is very tough.
So how can I remove this enemy? Enemy has entered my fort inside.
So very dangerous situation. If the enemy has entered the fort, then death is sure.
So how can I will this war against Maya illusory energy?
So the thing is we have to invite the Supreme Personality, just like the princesses.
16,000 princesses were married by Krishna. All these princesses were captured by Narakasur, a very big demon inside the fort.
So what did they do? They simply invited Krishna. Krishna, please come here and save us.
So Krishna entered the fort, destroyed all his defenses and eventually Krishna rescued 16,000 princesses.
In that way, now once if a girl has stayed outside because there is lot of risk for the girls, anything could have happened.
In Vedic culture, it is very difficult to find a suitable match.
So they all told now, Krishna, nobody is going to accept us. So you can only accept us. Please accept us as your wives.
In this way, Krishna accepted 16,000 queens as the wives.
So if we have to defeat this illusion, which is harassing us day in and day out.
So we have to simply invoke Krishna, invite Krishna. So in this war there would be defeat.
It is a constant struggle. Illusory energy are regular habits, old tendencies. They will try to push us.
I know it should not be done. Still, Krishna is being asked the same question by Arjuna.
What does force me to sinful activities? As if it is a very strong force.
Somebody is forcing me. I know I should not do it. It is wrong. But somebody forces. No, you have to do it.
And then later I repent my mistake. So what is this, Krishna?
So forcefully, the old tendency is the old habits, the wrong habits will force a person spiritual seeker into again those wrong habits.
So what is the solution to come out of it? So that is why Krishna gives the solution we discussed in the last class.
The solution is anybody would like to type the solution. Let me see who remembers from last class.
You all type questions. Now you should type some answers also.
What is the solution? Krishna tells definitely.
Krishna has given great assurance that even if somebody is failing in spiritual life,
but he's always engaged in my service, sadhu revah samantavya, 100% he should be considered sadhu.
But yes, it does not mean a person should be lax in spiritual life and think, oh, Krishna has told,
even if you sometimes fall down because of past habits, still you are sadhu.
So let me remain like the sadhu falls every other day.
No, the Shri Lapa Upad explains if you are falling down,
so that means you are still not on that high platform of devotional service.
But nevertheless, because you are following rules and regulations nicely morning to evening,
you are engaged in service of Krishna. You are sadhu.
But then how to come to this high platform? How to avoid accidental fall downs in spiritual life?
Spiritual life is going nice, nice and nice. And suddenly there is fall down.
There is pullback of the old forces in our body.
So answers have come. Come to my sharan.
Maam eva prapadyante. Even if we are making mistakes, still we should continue devotional service.
Always think of Krishna. Surrender to Krishna.
Koi aansar nahi de raha hai. What I want.
Chanting, yes. Controlling the senses, no.
Tivrena bhakti yog. Senses hi toh control nahi ho rahe hain. That is a trouble.
Yes, so chanting, some people have recommended Harinam Sankirtan.
That is a right answer. But which kind of chanting, chanting we are all doing still why it is happening.
So that is why it is told satatam kirtayan tomam in this chapter itself.
We saw 9 chapter verse number 14. Krishna tells always keep on chanting.
So Prabhupada again repeats this statement in the purport.
If you have to defeat this illusory energy, then what we have to do if we have to avoid accidental fall downs,
then satatam kirtayan tomam. Always keep on chanting the names of Krishna.
Just like as soon as the sun is not visible, immediately there is darkness.
And if there is sun, darkness immediately goes out.
So as soon as we forget Krishna, we are in Maya.
So there cannot be any intermediate platform, intermediate stage.
Either we can be in Krishna or we can be in Maya.
We can be in reality. We can be in delusion. There is no other stage.
So as soon as we forget Krishna, immediately we are in Maya.
So that is why always 24 hours a person should, Prabhupada tells, continuously incessantly keep on chanting.
So this is the solution. If you are always engaged in Krishna service and you are always chanting the names of Krishna,
then there is no scope of Maya. But sometimes service may not be possible.
I am trying to engage myself in Krishna service.
So when it is not possible, then please keep on chanting the names of Krishna always at least.
And even while we are doing service, Prabhupada tells, you are working in your factory or wherever.
Even though you are working directly for Krishna, your hands are free.
You please use your hands in whatever work you are doing, but your tongue you can use for chanting Hare Krishna.
You are driving a car, but your tongue is free. You can always use it for chanting Hare Krishna.
In this way, whatever work you are doing, you are walking, you are traveling.
Whenever, whatever work you are doing with other limbs, your tongue is free and you can chant the Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
So thus, if we have to avoid accidental fall downs, Prabhupada tells, then we have to always chant the Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
So spiritual life is Shurasya Dharia. Shurasya Dharia means like razor's edge.
So these twin sworded, twin blades razor were not there before.
That razor which the barber uses, single blade, dangerous razor was there.
And with that razor, if you are shaving, little inattention and there is bloodshed immediately.
So a person has to handle that razor very, very carefully.
Thus it is told, little inattention and there is chaos in the spiritual life, little inattention.
So just like a person while driving his car, he is always alert.
Oh, this car is not coming, that car, that vehicle person is not. He is very, very alert.
In a similar fashion, a sincere spiritualist should be very, very alert in his spiritual life.
Whether I am remembering Krishna or I am forgetful of Krishna at this moment.
In this way, throughout the day he should practice remembering Krishna.
How? Not directly, but by always chanting the names of Krishna.
So by always chanting the names of Krishna, mind would be forced to think of Krishna.
So this is the easy way of never forgetting Krishna.
And very, very important element of spiritual life.
Whenever Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was being asked anything,
So once Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, when he approached a leper,
entire body was full of diseases of that leper.
And wet sores were there, the pus was oozing out of the body.
And Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, when he heard that Chaitanya Mahaprabhu has come,
so immediately rushed to a spot.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was praying in a Brahmana's place.
So he reached that spot just to find out Chaitanya Mahaprabhu has left the very same day in the morning.
And then he became aghast, he became very morose.
Oh, I am so unfortunate, Lord Chaitanya has left, I could not have his darshan.
And when he was lamenting in such a way, very piteously crying, suddenly Lord Chaitanya appeared.
And then he embraced that leper Brahmana.
And immediately his entire leprosy got cured by the touch of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.
And when his leprosy got cured, so definitely if we were there in his position,
we would be very very happy. But this Brahmana became very afraid.
Why afraid? So he told that pride precedes fall down.
Krishna can tolerate anything but he doesn't tolerate pride in the heart of devotee.
Thus when he was dancing with the gopis,
so Krishna always wants to give personal affection and personal experience to all the devotees.
So when Krishna was dancing with the gopis in a circle,
so Krishna was there in between two gopis.
And then Krishna was there between next two set of gopis also.
In this way Krishna was dancing.
So Krishna had expanded himself into so many forms.
However, Krishna's experience which he gave to the gopis was that Krishna is dancing only with me.
Every gopi was thinking, none of the gopis were able to see how Krishna has expanded himself into so many forms.
All the gopis were thinking Krishna is dancing with me personally.
And then they became little proud. Oh, Krishna is dancing only with me.
Among all these gopis who have assembled.
And then as soon as Krishna realized that pride is sitting in their heart,
immediately Krishna vanished from the scene. He disappeared.
And then the gopis became very very mad.
And then they started searching Krishna here and there.
So as soon as there is pride in the heart of devotee, then fall down begins.
So devotee is supposed to be, that is why Lord Jesus said,
Kingdom of God is meant for meek and humble. Humility is very important.
Humility attracts the attention of God.
So this brahmana, he told, now you have cured me, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.
This is very special mercy.
So you have removed the effect of my destiny by your divine touch.
And this may make me proud that I have been the recipient of special mercy.
God is so favorable to me.
Although he left from the place he appeared just to just to help me get rid of this misery in my life.
So I may become proud. Please tell me what should I do?
So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu told him,
Always chant the names of Krishna without stoppage.
Incessantly keep on chanting Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna throughout the day.
And when you are chanting like this, incessantly that will keep the pride away.
So all these negative feelings in our heart, it could be lust, it could be pride, it could be anger,
the three doorways to hell, lust, greed and anger or pride or fear.
From where all these feelings they enter our body.
These feelings are the effect of rajaguna and tamaguna, the energies.
So when Krishna is seated in the heart, when we are chanting Hare Krishna,
thinking of Krishna in such a way, then where is the question of rajaguna and tamaguna affecting us?
So by always chanting Krishna when Krishna is placed in the heart,
there is no chance of these energies affecting us.
And then whenever Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, anybody who has asked Chaitanya Mahaprabhu for anything,
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu would recommend the same thing.
Always keep on chanting the names of Krishna, 24 hours.
When the prostitute surrendered to Haridas Thakur, please elevate me.
How can I advance in spiritual life?
Same thing he told. Worship this Tulsi plant and in front of Tulsi,
always keep on chanting Hare Krishna Maha Mantra incessantly.
So thus this is the secret of advancement in spiritual life.
Incessantly chanting Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
So of course we cannot do that.
So that is why Prabhupada has mercifully reduced it to minimum 16 rounds.
You should try to chant as much as possible.
If you want to avoid accidental strikes of Maya against us.
But still, if throughout life we are able to maintain our 16 rounds of chanting
and follow four regulative principles,
nobody can disturb us from attaining success of spiritual life.
This is the assurance.
So thus it is my humble request to all of you to as much as possible,
always keep on chanting the names of Krishna.
And at least 16 rounds we should do very, very nicely.
However, this is also not the most important factor for advancement in spiritual life.
So let me see if somebody can answer.
What is that most important aspect to advance in spiritual life?
You can type please if you have some understanding.
Association of devotees, detachment, service to Vaishnava,
ABCD, devotional service, surrender to Krishna's pure devotee,
chanting association, kirtan, prasadam, write all the answers.
Prabhu, choose any of the above.
Humility, preaching harina, mercy of Guru and Krishna, love to Krishna,
mercy of pure devotee, no emotional, spreading Krishna consciousness,
having Guru, causeless, reading Bhagavad Gita,
preaching of Krishna consciousness, following instructions of spiritual master,
complete surrender to Guru, surrendering to true Krishna bhakt,
intense desire, book distribution.
OK, OK, OK. Thank you so much. We can pause now.
It's a deluge of answers.
So thank you very, very much for writing the answers.
So let us try to understand what is the most important single factor
for advancement in spiritual life.
So once Srila Prabhupada, again, he had very, very hectic schedule.
Srila Prabhupada would travel always across the globe
just to give transcendental enthusiasm to his devotees.
And when Srila Prabhupada would travel,
he also would behave transcendently, defying all the jet lags.
Although other times Prabhupada would respect the laws of nature,
but sometimes he would simply defy, especially when it comes to jet lag.
Although Prabhupada would not have slept, he continuously in night he sat
and then when he reaches the other place.
So immediately it is morning. It is time for Mangala Arati.
And again Prabhupada would start the same morning program.
Again, five hours sadhana and everything.
And the disciples, they are struggling to catch up with spiritual master
and you just sleep for two hours at night.
And then he is just translating on and on.
So for the disciples, it was very, very tough to keep up their schedule
with the spiritual master who is not sleeping at all.
So Srila Prabhupada would keep some of the very senior devotees as his secretaries
to do his personal work, dictate letters and print all those things and carry out his
what a secretary is supposed to do.
So because of such hectic schedule, which Prabhupada was maintaining for many, many days,
this particular secretary, he became very agitated in his mind and very sad.
And then he expressed to Srila Prabhupada, Srila Prabhupada told, yes,
I think I'm not making advancement in spiritual life.
Can you please change my service?
Prabhupada told, what makes you think so that you are not advancing in your spiritual life?
So he told Prabhupada, actually the schedule is so busy.
I have to do all these things.
So I'm not able to chant even 16 rounds of Hare Krishna Mahamantra every day,
which is very, very important.
Wow of a disciple.
Always he has to chant 16 rounds throughout his life.
So he told Prabhupada, I'm so busy.
I'm sorry to tell.
I'm not able to chant 16 rounds of Hare Krishna Mahamantra also every day.
So I feel I'm not advancing in spiritual life.
So then Srila Prabhupada told this devotee to simply keep on serving me.
And the next day when Prabhupada was giving Bhagavatam class,
so Prabhupada told, looking towards the devotee directly,
Prabhupada told, we are not here even to make spiritual advancement.
We are here simply to serve the spiritual master.
But somehow devotee was not able to understand yet.
And again, he requested Prabhupada, Prabhupada, can you please change my service?
I'm not able to chant my rounds.
So Prabhupada would never force anyone.
Prabhupada was very, very merciful.
He would suggest because it is very important.
Sometimes we are telling that why Krishna does not reveal?
Why Krishna does not?
How can we advance in spiritual life?
Now I am understanding this thing was not revealed to me before.
Nobody told me all these things.
Just like yesterday we discussed that old lady asked Prabhupada,
why you have come now?
Why you have not?
Why did not come before?
We asked.
So actually that is very important instance.
When Prabhupada was in somewhere in Gujarat, I think.
So some of these people, the businessmen and others,
they came to meet Prabhupada and then they told Prabhupada,
Guruji, you please order us.
We want to make a temple of Krishna.
We are just waiting for your order.
If you order us, we will make that temple.
So Prabhupada told, yeah, it's OK.
It's good if you try.
Try to make a temple.
No, no, you please order us.
We are just waiting for instruction.
If you order us, we have to make.
We will make that temple.
We are waiting for that.
Again, Prabhupada did like that.
It's OK.
It is nice if you can make.
No, Prabhupada, you order.
Prabhupada told, if I order and then you are not able to do it,
then that is very serious offense.
So now if you try, you do not.
You are unable to do it.
It is OK.
But if I order you do it and then you are not able to do it,
then that is an offense and disobeying the instructions of
spiritual master is a very serious offense in spiritual life,
not obeying the instructions of spiritual master.
That is why spiritual master is very,
very careful to give the instruction as per the level,
the capacity of the disciple.
So that is why unless the disciple is very,
very sincere, submissive and humble in attitude,
the spiritual master is not willing to disclose the secrets of
spiritual life to such a disciple.
So it is very,
very important to be very,
very serious and humble,
willing to take the instructions of spiritual master.
Then the instructions will be given.
But if the spiritual master sees that this person will not be
able to follow my instructions,
he would not give also the instructions because if the
disciple disobeys,
then that is a very great impediment in his spiritual life.
So Prabhupada,
that is why I would never force anybody seeing that the poor
person may not be able to follow,
although it is highest instruction.
So once the disciples were asking,
so Prabhupada, can I do this preaching in this way?
Prabhupada told, yes,
you can do that.
And then he asked,
Prabhupada, can I do this the other way?
Prabhupada, yes,
you can do that also.
So this disciple got further.
He told, Prabhupada,
you please tell me what should I do?
So anything.
No Prabhupada,
you please tell me what do you want me to do?
And then Prabhupada told,
yes,
you should ask what do I want you to do and not that what you
want to do.
So when a disciple is willing to take this instruction,
not even following spiritual life whimsically,
but very,
very eager to accept from spiritual master,
what should I do?
Then that is a proper candidate for very swift,
advanced British spiritual life.
So that's Prabhupada did not force this disciple.
And then this disciple was relieved of the services of
secretary and once relieved because these secretaries were
very responsible people because they have to travel with
Prabhupada and do very important work.
He was made the governing body commissioner.
That is one of the top authority,
the top most authority of that region for North America or
some other place,
some few set of countries or some continent.
He was made the overseeing authority of that place.
And within a week or so of this change of service,
when he started chanting 16 hours very nicely,
that devotee fell down from a spiritual position and he left
the movement.
He could not continue.
So someone may wonder why this has happened.
So the devotee was not able to chant Hare Krishna
Mahamantra still he was continuing and when he started
chanting 16 rounds of Hare Krishna every day,
then the devotee fell down.
So what caused this fall down?
So actually that disciple could not understand.
Unfortunately,
that it is not that that 16 rounds is saving the disciple.
What happens by chanting 16 rounds?
Many times people ask as we discussed before also.
So always chanting is recommended 24 hours without cessation
to advance in spiritual life.
But 16 rounds is recommended by a pure devotee of Krishna.
That is why Krishna declares.
So let us read this Shloka again,
which we read in the last class.
So I'll share the screen now.
So Sheila Prabhupada,
our spiritual master,
founder of worldwide Hare Krishna movement,
very nicely explains this.
This verse number 29 from the Bhagavad Gita,
which tells,
So a person is always engaged in my service.
He can have endless faults,
unlimited faults.
Whenever you are preaching,
do not see whether the person is qualified or not.
Simply if that person is willing to chant Hare Krishna
Mahamantra,
whether that person,
the Vedas mentioned,
he's grossly attached to spiritual life or is a renounced saint,
whether he's having all satvik habits or is in extreme tamuguna
on whichever platform is situated.
If he's agreeing to engage in the service of Krishna,
chanting his names,
he will be delivered from all the nescience.
Very soon,
very quickly he becomes righteous and attains lasting peace.
And then Krishna tells Arjuna to declare
So here Krishna is telling Arjuna to declare.
Why?
Krishna himself could have declared,
Arjuna,
my devotee never perishes.
But Krishna is telling here Arjuna to declare
because Krishna can break his promise,
as he has broken in the past also.
Just to save Arjuna and keep the promise of Bhishma,
Krishna broke his own promise that
I will not lift weapon in the battle of Kurukshetra.
So Arjuna is telling Arjuna to declare.
Krishna broke his own promise that
I will not lift weapon in the battle of Kurukshetra.
So Krishna is so kind,
when his devotee is in danger,
Bhishma fought so vigorously and valiantly that day.
Arjuna's chariot broke into pieces
and Arjuna became almost dead.
At that time Krishna understood
that now is the time to break my promise.
If I don't save,
Arjuna is dead.
So just to save his devotee,
Krishna lifted the weapon.
Krishna lifted the wheel of the chariot
and rushed towards Bhishma to kill Bhishma immediately.
And then Bhishma obviously stopped.
That was his vow.
So Krishna can break his vow
just to safeguard the interest of his devotee
or because he is supreme autocrat,
there is no power over and above him.
However, Krishna breaks his promise for his devotee.
So when his devotee says anything,
Krishna will make sure it happens.
It comes to pass at all costs.
So that is why any word which comes out of the mouth of his devotee,
Krishna makes sure that it happens for sure.
It comes to pass very soon.
So that is why a pure devotee of Krishna has declared
that if you chant the 16 rounds of Hare Krishna Mahamantra every day
and follow four regulative principles,
then what will happen?
Then Krishna will make sure
your spiritual life is successful
because pure devotee has promised.
So by doing this process,
we attract the mercy of pure devotee.
And when pure devotee is merciful,
then it attracts the mercy of Krishna.
In this way, the spiritual life becomes successful.
So it is told the spiritual master carries the power of attorney.
What is the power of attorney?
A person can own a very big industry enterprise,
but if he gives power of attorney to some person,
just like it happened in Mumbai,
typically we have seen the proprietor of the Raymond's Industries,
very big man, very rich man.
As soon as he gave the power of attorney to his son,
his son removed his father only from all the properties
and from the house also.
So very unfortunate.
That is the way the things unfold in material world, very uncertain.
Now life is very miserable living in a small flat somewhere, his father.
So because the son got power of attorney,
now nothing is left with father.
Now whatever the son decides,
wherever he signs the power of entire property
comes in the hand of such a person.
In a similar fashion, Krishna tells,
I am under the control of my devotee.
I am not free. My devotee controls me.
Wherever to whomever, whichever person my devotee wants,
that I should give Krishna to this person,
I have to go to that person.
So thus Krishna can give anything which you want,
whatever material benefits you want,
other benefits you want in life, Krishna will give easily.
But he will not give devotional service,
strong love and attraction for Krishna very easily.
Because as soon as he gives devotional service to somebody,
bhakti to somebody, Krishna becomes the property of his devotee.
So thus Krishna will give anything easily.
But before giving devotional service,
Krishna will test you hundred and thousand times.
Because Krishna becomes the property of his devotee.
So thus the most important service for spiritual advancement is actually,
Srila Prabhupada explained,
we are not here even to make spiritual advancement.
Yes, actually we are here for spiritual advancement,
but that is the mood of devotee.
I want no personal ambition,
neither material advancement,
nor even spiritual pleasure or spiritual advancement.
I simply want to engage in the service of my spiritual master.
And this mood is very nicely exhibited by the charioteer of Krishna.
So those who are liberated personalities,
as soon as they see Krishna, they hear of Krishna,
they immediately are overcome by intense ecstasy,
that their limbs stop working, their voice starts choking,
and all these symptoms are manifest in their body.
And that Krishna's charioteer who is watching Krishna from such a close distance,
so when he would see Krishna, he would immediately get overwhelmed by ecstasy.
And in this ecstasy, he would be unable to do the task of Krishna.
So thus, in order so that Krishna's service should not be hampered,
he will stop looking at Krishna and control his ecstasy.
So thus he rejects spiritual pleasure also.
So generally people take to spiritual life for pleasure.
Initially they take just for peace,
at least please let me get rid of these material miseries,
I am fed up, I want peace of mind.
And when devotee advances further in knowledge,
then peace is also very third-class thing for a devotee,
he wants positive pleasure, that is spiritual pleasure.
And when the devotee advances further,
he rejects his spiritual pleasure also,
and also when the spiritual pleasure becomes obstruction in the service of Krishna.
Now if that person is overwhelmed by ecstasy,
he cannot drive the chariot for Krishna.
So thus he rejects that spiritual ecstasy also,
and he focuses on pulling the reins of the chariot in the service of Krishna.
So thus this is the moot of the topmost transcendentalist and devotee.
So Prabhupada explained to that devotee,
we are not here even for making spiritual advancement.
Many times the devotees ask,
we don't feel I am making or I am not making spiritual advancement,
we have our own concoctions about spiritual advancement.
However, what is real spiritual advancement?
Real spiritual advancement means,
how sincerely a person is engaging in the service of spiritual master.
Thus I will read some very important instructions
about this understanding from the scriptures.
So let us start with Bhagavad Gita.
You cannot create your own religion.
What is religion, what is right, wrong, God tells.
Therefore, mental speculation or dry arguments cannot help one progress in spiritual life.
There is no use of mental speculation and dry arguments.
No, this is right, we should worship this, we should worship in this way.
This is right path of spiritual advancement.
This yoga is good, that yoga is good.
There is no scope of mental speculation.
Lawyers don't tell, oh, according to me, I think law is like this.
He can stop at green light and drive at red light.
There is no question of speculation.
Law has to be taken from the authority who has made laws.
Similarly, what is right and what is wrong,
it does not depend upon you.
It is not relative.
There is something which is absolutely right and wrong,
which is defined by the lawmaker, God himself.
Therefore, one has to approach a bona fide spiritual master to receive such knowledge.
Such spiritual master should be accepted in full surrender.
4th chapter, verse number 34.
Pranipatena pariprashena sevaya
And one should serve the spiritual master like a menial servant without false prestige.
Satisfaction of the self-realized spiritual master is a secret of advancement in spiritual life.
So satisfaction of self-realized spiritual master.
Spiritual master has to be accepted in complete surrender
and spiritual master has to be offered service like a menial servant.
And then spiritual master would be satisfied.
Satisfaction of self-realized spiritual master is the secret of advancement in spiritual life.
One must be able to pass the test of spiritual master
and when he sees the genuine desire of disciple,
he automatically blesses the disciple with genuine spiritual understanding.
In Bhagavatam 7 canto, it is mentioned.
It is further stated,
And
Simply by rendering service to the spiritual master,
one crosses the ocean of nescience and returns home back to Godhead.
Thus, he gradually sees the Supreme Lord face to face and enjoys life in association with the Lord.
The ultimate goal of yoga is to come in contact with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Unless this point is achieved, one's so-called yoga practice is simply labor without any benefit.
So here it is mentioned,
So again, service to the spiritual master is stressed here.
Again, this very word is used in the 13th chapter of Bhagavad Gita
where Krishna is describing the elements of knowledge.
Today we can see that the person is behaving like an animal lacking even common sense,
but he has great degrees against his name.
He does not even understand simple things.
If somebody cuts my hand, why should I give pain to other living entities?
They also suffer from the same pain which I have.
So why should I kill animals simply for the satisfaction of my tongue?
People having big, big degrees enjoying the posts of leaders,
they don't understand, they don't have this common sense and empathy.
So then what is the use of education?
They are highly uneducated.
This is simple sense which they are lacking.
They lack simple sense in life.
They talk big, big words.
Have you seen God?
What is the proof of the Vedas?
Who has seen?
But whatever they have seen, at least that they can understand
that satisfaction never comes on the level of physical existence.
How much ever, this is the life of a Karmic.
He wants a million dollars.
And when he gets that million, he wants another million.
This is the life of a Karmic.
He is never satisfied in his life.
Everyone is working very hard simply to satisfy the greed.
For need, a person has enough in his life.
But everyone is taught how to become greedy, greedy, greedy.
And this greediness is creating intense competition.
Intense competition is creating frustration.
So much to extend that a person is committing suicide.
On an advanced nation like America, there is mass killing.
People are so much depressed and distressed because of this greed.
Why this greed is happening?
Because there is no satisfaction.
We have seen this, but still it doesn't strike a person.
That this life which I am following to satisfy my senses and mind,
none of the material pursuits and achievements will satisfy me.
Although he has experienced, he has seen in the world,
but it doesn't strike him.
So this is not education.
So how to understand then which person has knowledge
that Krishna, God himself, defines in Bhagavad Gita?
All of you please read.
13 chapter, verse number 8 through 12.
Krishna defines elements of knowledge.
Chapter 13, verse 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
So it starts with
Usually people are very proud.
If they read few columns in newspaper for a couple of years,
and if they read some books, I have read 20, 30, 40, 100 books,
then they think they have become Prakant Pandit, a great scholar.
And they become very proud.
And they keep this person quotes like this, this poet quotes like this,
this philosopher quotes like this, without understanding all these things.
Simply by cramming few things, they think they have become scholar and wise, learned.
However, what is the situation of wise man?
First thing is,
First two things.
He would be very, very humble and he would be prideless.
Why?
Because a person understands all the knowledge which I am having,
which I am getting through my senses.
It gets filtered through the energy which is conducting my body.
If a person is sleeping, if he is drunk,
he will perceive the entire world differently.
He will not understand what is what.
Even though you put best theories in front of him, he will not understand.
He would be lying in drain and he is thinking I am lying in a very nice cushion in my bedroom.
He would be imagining something else.
Similarly, if a person is sick, we have discussed many times over,
he would find the food is bitter.
Thus, the knowledge which I am perceiving through my senses,
I am helpless to perceive them in absolute sense.
I can only tell what my senses are telling me.
Thus, a human being having sense, having knowledge,
first of all, he becomes very, very humble.
I can never tell absolute reality using my senses.
In dream, I see a different reality, but that is not reality.
That is dream, actually. It is all false.
Thus, using my mind and body, which are cheating me at every moment,
I can never tell what is the truth of life.
Thus, a person is very humble and eagerly trying to find a person
who is a person who is not affected by mind and body and all these forces
and who has got knowledge from the lawmaker, the God himself.
Thus, Krishna tells, first of all, he is amanitvam, pride-less.
I am in no capacity to get knowledge directly or to give knowledge directly.
So, he is pride-less. I am helpless.
Just like a blind person is helpless, similarly, a person in knowledge is helpless.
He is humble. Albert Einstein also told,
the more knowledge a person gets, the more humble he becomes.
Advancement means a person knows how much I do not know.
He becomes more humble.
And then, ahimsa. Then, ahimsa kshantirarjavam.
A person who is knowledgeable, this sense will strike to him.
Why to do ahimsa? Why to do violence?
If somebody hurts me, I feel pain. Why should I hurt any other person?
What is the use of these developed nations,
which are maintaining big slaughterhouses lacking common sense?
So, that is why, after this humility,
a knowledgeable person will have ahimsa, kshantirarjavam,
and he will be very, very peaceful,
because he will not work hard for satisfying the senses.
So, his life is very, very peaceful. Ahimsa, kshantirarjavam.
Amanitvam, adhambitvam.
And then, acharyupasanam, shaucham.
Stharyam atma vinigrahaha.
Then, acharyupasanam.
Now, he is humble, he is very peaceful,
and he knows, I have to do acharyupasanam.
I have to approach a bona fide spiritual master to get knowledge.
So, acharyupasanam, approaching a bona fide spiritual master,
is also an element of knowledge.
So, a person who is having some sanity, some sobriety,
he will understand, having spiritual master is very, very important in my life.
And then, again, it is mentioned.
Arjuna was advised in 2nd canto of Bhagavatam,
to receive transcendental knowledge from the realized person
by surrenders, question and service.
Again, simply questions will not work.
And if a person is very humble and surrendered,
apart from this, service is required to get the knowledge.
Receiving transcendental knowledge is not like exchanging dollars.
You can go and collect like that.
Such knowledge has to be received by service to the spiritual master.
Again, it is stressed here in the 2nd canto.
So, spiritual knowledge has to be received how?
Not like you go to bank and swipe a card or ATM and you get the cash. No.
Such transcendental knowledge has to be received by,
in Bhagavad Gita, God is telling,
pranipatena pariprasnena sevaya, service is important.
Thus, many, many people tell,
Prabhu, I am doing very nicely, following the things nicely.
But, sir, how much service you have rendered to your spiritual master
without rendering service?
Where is the question of spiritual advancement?
Where is the question of receiving knowledge?
As Brahmaji received the knowledge directly from the Lord by satisfying him fully,
similarly, one has to receive the transcendental knowledge from the spiritual master
by satisfying him.
Direct shloka comes in the teachings of Prahlad Maharaj.
rajas tamascha satvena satvam chopashamena cha etat sarvam gurav bhaktiapurushohi anjasa jaye
7th canto, 15th chapter, verse 25.
So, Prahlad Maharaj is quoting the shloka.
rajas tamascha satvena
So, we understood last week how there are different convictions and understandings.
Tamasic person will have different faith and understanding of life.
Rajasic person will perceive the world differently.
And Satvic person will perceive the world differently.
So, this shloka tells,
and unless a person comes to shuddh satva,
he will not understand spiritual affairs at all.
So, that is why entire spiritual life means purification,
getting rid of tamoguna, rajoguna and even satvaguna,
rising to spiritual platform.
So, how do we do that?
There are various processes recommended to come to this platform.
rajas tamascha satvena
satvam chopashamena cha etat sarvam gurav bhaktiapurushohi anjasa jaye
One must conquer the mode of passion and ignorance by developing the mode of goodness.
So, that is why the Vedic culture recommends.
You get up in the morning, Brahmohurta.
You eat only vegetarian diet which is offered to Krishna.
And you have your occupation which doesn't make you work very very hard.
And all these Satvic things are recommended to the people.
Because one must conquer the modes of passion and ignorance by developing the mode of goodness.
And then one must become detached from the mode of goodness
by promoting oneself to platform of shuddh satva.
Then goodness also limits one to this world.
So, by promoting to shuddh satva, a person should transcend goodness also.
Now, important line.
etat sarvam gurav bhaktiapurushohi anjasa jaye
All this can be automatically done if one engages in the service of the spiritual master with faith and devotion.
In this way, one can conquer the influence of the modes of nature.
So, slow process is recommended.
First of all, from rajasthu tamas, from rajasthu a person should go to satvaguna.
And then from satvaguna, a person should rise to shuddh satvaguna.
However, here it is mentioned, all this can be automatically done.
Prahlad Maharaj is telling.
If one engages in the service of the spiritual master,
etat sarvam gurav bhaktiapurushohi anjasa jaye
service of the spiritual master with faith and devotion.
In this way, one can conquer the influence of the modes of nature.
Just by treating the root cause of the ailment,
one can conquer all bodily pains and sufferings.
Similarly, if one is devoted and faithful to the spiritual master,
one can conquer the influence of satvaguna, rajaguna and tamaguna very easily.
Yogis and jnanis practice in many ways to conquer the senses,
but the bhakta immediately attains the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
through the mercy of the spiritual master.
If the spiritual master is favorably inclined,
one naturally receives the mercy of the Supreme Lord.
And by the mercy of the Supreme Lord, one immediately becomes transcendental,
conquering all the influences of satvaguna, rajaguna and tamaguna within this material world.
If one is a pure devotee acting under the directions of Guru,
one easily gets the mercy of the Supreme Lord
and thus becomes immediately situated on transcendental platform.
So thus there are many many shlokas like this.
The Vedas are full of such shlokas.
So by serving the spiritual master very very nicely,
a person is able to please the Supreme Lord, not directly.
The Supreme Lord has given the power of attorney to the spiritual master.
Now whoever the spiritual master wants, he can distribute this power, this love of Godhead.
That is the power of the spiritual master.
So thus, the spiritual master, Sheila Prabhupada, wanted to drive home this point to the disciple.
Even if you are not able to chant, what will happen by chanting?
I will be pleased. And when I am pleased, Krishna will be pleased.
And then you will be able to transcend the modes of nature.
And if I am telling you don't chant and you do this, then automatically that is success.
So taking initiation is very important.
Surrendering to spiritual master, the spiritual master becomes very pleased.
But sometimes, like in the case of George Harrison,
Prabhupada was so much pleased, he told there is no need for you to take initiation.
You are already, his name was Harrison, you are Hari's son, Prabhupada told.
H-A-R-I-S-S-O-N, you are already Hari's son, there is no need for initiation for you.
So when spiritual master is pleased, there is no need for initiation also.
A spiritual master tells like that.
So thus, the most important, why initiation is important, why 16 rounds, why all these things, why small small things,
because all these things have been introduced by spiritual master, as simple as that.
So this is the secret of success of spiritual life.
Rendering sincere service for the satisfaction of spiritual master.
So all the things which we are following, all the programs that we are doing,
we are doing in the hope that one day spiritual master will be pleased with us.
And when spiritual master is pleased, something even more extraordinary happens.
So it is told, the Vedas are telling, a person has to be 100% pure to advance in spiritual life.
So Sheila Prabhupada was explaining this in a class, as Kunti Marani also tells,
Unless a person is 100% surrendered to the spiritual master,
if a person is 100% free of the material desires, he cannot go back to Godhead.
So Prabhupada told, even if you have a pinch of material desire,
you have some expectation, I want to enjoy this kind of material pleasure,
then we will stay back in this world.
Such a person will not go back to Godhead, even if a little desire is there.
So you have to become 100% pure and free of material desires to go back to Godhead.
And then Prabhupada looked at his disciples and disciples were crushed, fallen.
How is it possible? All the Western very new disciples,
how we can remove, there are gallons of desires,
how to remove even the last pinch of material desire from the heart.
So then Prabhupada told, okay, if you're 90% pure, then also you can go back to Godhead.
But again, they were very, very disappointed.
Then Prabhupada told, okay, if you're 80% pure, then you will go back to Godhead.
Still disciples were not sure.
And then Prabhupada told, something 70 or 75%, then you will go back to Godhead.
And disciples chanted, Jai, yes, this can be done.
70-75% we can target, this is achievable.
So Prabhupada told, okay, if you're 80% pure, then you will go back to Godhead.
This is achievable. So Prabhupada promised.
And then Prabhupada finished the class, he started moving towards his room, his quarters.
And then one disciple, he went behind Prabhupada
and he told Prabhupada, I think I cannot make even 70% freedom also from material desires.
So Prabhupada told, it's okay, you just catch my dhoti
and I have the back door entry to the spiritual world.
So Prabhupada revealed this very wonderful secret of spiritual life.
You just stick to me, you hold my dhoti means simply stick to me,
simply keep on following my instructions very, very sincerely throughout your life.
So Prabhupada mentioned spiritual life is so nice.
If a person is just sincerely trying to follow the instructions,
even though he may fail, he may not be able to follow,
but he's very sincerely trying, he will get the results of perfectly following the instruction.
If a person is, I repeat, very, very sincerely trying to follow instruction perfectly,
he will get the result of perfectly following the instruction.
It doesn't happen in material world.
Ma'am, I tried very hard to clear the exam, please give me the entry.
No, it will not happen. You have to actually clear the exam.
But in spiritual life, if a person is simply very sincerely trying to follow
instruction of spiritual master, even though he's unable to follow for some reason,
he will get the result of perfectly following the instruction.
And then there is one more case also.
When a devotee is not even willing to make a spiritual life perfect,
his spiritual master is pleased.
It so happened that when devotee was there and that devotee met with an accident
or something happened, he passed away.
And then the wife and children of the devotee, they came to me,
Sheila Prabhupada and they told Sheila Prabhupada that this has happened
and like that. So Prabhupada told he has gone back to Godhead.
Don't worry. His life is successful.
Anyway, death has to come. But if a person goes back, so it is very nice.
So then the disciple who was standing next to Prabhupada, he thought,
oh, he can go back to Godhead.
He was a new devotee and he thought apparently not very advanced also.
And how maybe Prabhupada just to give some solace to his family members,
he's telling he has gone back to Godhead.
That's how he thought in his mind.
And then after a few days, Prabhupada again repeated.
He told his name and then he told his disciple.
Actually, he was not willing to go back to Godhead.
So it is told if you have to go to back to Godhead, what is the thing which you want?
The thing which is required is intense eagerness to do it.
Intense eagerness for spiritual advancement, intense eagerness to see Krishna face to face,
intense eagerness to go back to Godhead.
When a person is so very intensely eager,
this intense eagerness happens by following sadhana very, very nicely,
mercy, aspiration, master.
And when a person is very eager to see Krishna, Krishna will be seen.
However, even if a person is not eager, so Prabhupada told,
so he was not eager to go, he was not willing to go back to Godhead.
But Krishna made an exception.
So this is called Kripa Siddhi, Prabhupada tells.
There are two Siddhis, Sadhana Siddhi and Kripa Siddhi.
Sadhana Siddhi means there is Nitya Siddhi also.
Nitya means like Prabhupada, they are always liberated.
Such personalities, Gurus, they come here to liberate us.
They are Nitya Siddhi.
And then there is Sadhana Siddhi.
By very, very strictly following rules and regulations,
a person becomes perfect, free from the laws of nature, birth and death.
And then there is Kripa Siddhi. What is Kripa Siddhi?
As we understood by Sadhana also, we have to attract Kripa of Guru.
Then what is this Kripa Siddhi?
Kripa Siddhi, Prabhupada explains, that a person does not want to make spiritual advancement,
but spiritual advancement is forced upon the disciple.
That is called Kripa Siddhi.
You don't want money, but I am pushing money in your pocket.
Take, take, take money, Prabhupada told.
This is Kripa Siddhi.
So even though the disciple was not willing to go back to Godhead,
but Krishna made an exception because he was dear to Prabhupada.
Prabhupada wanted to make him go back to Godhead, so Krishna accepted him.
Krishna made exception.
So thus, I am the property of my devotee, I am under his subjugation.
Thus, Krishna tells, serving the spiritual master in complete surrender and his satisfaction,
this is the most important factor for advancement in spiritual life.
Our chanting that we do, our reading that we do, our hearing that we do,
anything that we are doing in spiritual life, even devotee association,
the spiritual master is merciful.
Without devotee association, we will make spiritual advancement.
In demoniac association, we will make spiritual advancement.
The spiritual master is pleased.
Just like Bali Maharaj.
When he was told to rule over the lower planets, the demons,
he was very scared that God, you are telling, sending me there, Krishna.
In their association, I will get polluted.
So Vamanadev told, don't worry.
I bless you, you will not be contaminated by their association.
Similar thing was explained.
The benediction was given to Preevrat Maharaj by Parikshit Maharaj.
He wanted to take sannyas directly.
He did not want to become a grahastha.
But Brahma told, now it is responsible.
It is required to have this responsibility.
One strong king is required to rule over all these planets.
So you please enter grahastha ashram.
You please take the role of king.
I guarantee you will not be entangled.
So that's actually if the spiritual master is merciful,
even without association, a person can advance.
So by association, by reading, by chanting, by doing anything,
what we wish to attract in our life is the satisfaction of spiritual master.
So that's we should focus simply to render sincere service to spiritual master.
Follow his instructions very, very nicely.
And there's the secret.
But then how do we serve our spiritual master?
So Srila Prabhupada is not there in physical body.
Then how can we render service unto him?
He does not speak to me, does not give instruction.
Earlier disciples were fortunate.
They were able to give service to his body, follow his instructions, take instructions from him.
How do I do that now?
Who will guide me now?
How can I render service and see to it that my spiritual master is satisfied?
How that is possible?
That is very much possible even now that we will see tomorrow in tomorrow's class.
For now, I would finish today's class.
And those who are willing to carry on, they can please carry on.
I will stay online for some more time for taking questions.
So those who have, you can please put forth your questions and I'll be glad to answer.
So I'll answer the questions which have been posted after 8 40.
The knowledge you are spreading.
Does this activity fall under serving spiritual master category?
Yes.
We will not do anything which is not falling under the category of serving spiritual master.
So spiritual master may give unique orders.
Just like Haridas Thakur was ordered by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu to simply chant the holy names day in and day out.
This was the order given to him.
But the order given to Roop Goswami and Sanatana Goswami was to compose literatures and spread the plan preaching in a similar fashion.
Instruction given to Prabhupada was to spread this knowledge in English language, especially to the Western countries and across the world.
So thus we are following the instruction of our spiritual master by preaching very, very nicely.
Rabuji, I'm disciple of Shri Shri Thakur Anukul Chandra.
He is founder of Satsang.
Main ashram in Devghar.
They had started Acharya Paddhati, his son, then his son, then his son continue.
There is all are worshipping Shri Shri Thakur only as God.
Here all disciples proving with different ways that he has done many leela and his purushottam,
avatar of Vishnu Bhagwan like Shri Ram and Shri Krishna.
I got initiated here and got satnaam for japa.
He told to chant this satnaam continuously, not need to count when taking name of God.
So he not given mala, given mala.
He given satnaam is also one of the name of Lord Krishna.
But now from few days I'm not in touch with this satsang.
Can I need to continue with him or I follow his con?
Please show the way.
So for this also we have session how to understand who is a bona fide spiritual master.
There are so everyone accepts Lord Krishna, Lord Ramachandra.
They are God themselves.
Now somebody can claim that I'm incarnation.
How to verify that?
How to understand who is incarnation?
Who is God?
How to understand who is a true guru?
We'll be covering that also in a couple of days.
So please keep hearing these lectures.
We will cover all these points and your doubt will be cleared without any doubt.
You mentioned Krishna is God or father of Gods, all Lords.
Krishna is incarnation of Vishnu.
Does it mean he's father of Brahma and Shiva as well?
Then why are they called Trimurti?
Trimurti sounds like Gods of same rank.
So this we have discussed in the past sessions also.
I think you could not attend those sessions.
Anyway, in future sessions, we will try to cover these points again.
So Lord Brahma, Lord Shiva and Lord Vishnu, they are called Trimurtis.
Because these three forms, these three personalities are the topmost authorities of this universe.
And they are in charge of controlling the three energies which make up everything of this universe.
Satpaguna, Rajaguna and Tamaguna.
So in that way, yes, Brahma is also as powerful as Lord Vishnu.
But his powers are dependent upon Lord Vishnu.
This is the difference, Shiva Prabhupada explains.
Brahma is incarnation of Krishna, expansion of Krishna's potency, incarnation of...
He's called Gunavatar, mode of passion, has incarnated in the form of Lord Brahma.
And Brahma is also Shaktyaveshavatar, Krishna's creative potency.
The same energy which Krishna has for creation, it has descended in the form of Lord Brahma.
So in that sense, Brahma has the potency like Lord Krishna, but his potency is dependent upon Lord Krishna.
So thus, Lord Krishna is supreme. From him, Lord Vishnu has expanded.
And from him, Lord Shiva and Brahma have come.
So Trimurti means the three topmost authorities of this material world.
With limited knowledge I have, I can say that yes, spreading knowledge about Bhagavad Gita falls under the service of spiritual master.
Prabhupada wanted his devotees to spread this knowledge across the world, Hare Krishna.
Okay, somebody is giving answer also.
I'm addicted to it, but I like it. So what should I do? Please explain.
So try to restrict, avoid as much as possible, take milk and other things and simply stick to spiritual life very, very nicely.
Chant in here very, very attentively every day and try to distribute books, try to preach.
By following rigidly the principles of spiritual life, these things will go away automatically.
My sister is a complete devotee of Krishna. She has very long hair, but she has started thinking she's feeling proud of her long hair.
So she wants to go to Tirupati and get hair cut completely, get bald.
So is it advisable to a married woman who has two sons of 10 and nine years old?
She wants to do it so that her pride will go. Anything done for the satisfaction of Krishna is okay,
but it should be done strictly under the orders of spiritual master.
So usually the widows would not keep the hairs in the Vedic culture
because they want to have a simple life and they don't want to become center of attraction.
So if a person is willing to sacrifice anything for pleasing Lord Krishna, it is nice.
But Srila Prabhupada did not give any explicit instructions regarding this.
So if it helps us in remembrance of Lord Krishna more, she can definitely do it.
And if it leads to forgetfulness of Lord Krishna, she should not do it.
So this is the deciding criteria. So it is not at all harmful if she is willing to shave her head
so that she can focus on Krishna nicely. If it helps us to focus, that is nice.
Our books seek to be well into spiritual master. Why did Arjuna?
Yes, just like Krishna and Krishna's name, there is no difference on absolute platform.
There is no difference between a person, his name, his instructions, his activities, his form, etc.
So whenever you see a picture of Krishna, then Krishna is present in that picture.
Krishna can talk through that picture. Krishna can accept all the services through that picture.
Similarly, Bhagavad Gita is again non-different from Krishna's personality.
And similar fashion, spiritual master is also on the absolute platform, liberated platform.
So when you read the instructions of spiritual master, it is non-different from associating with spiritual master.
So that is why real association with spiritual master means following his instructions very, very nicely.
So there is no difference between Srila Prabhupada and his books.
And Prabhupada told, I will live from my books and you will utilize.
So more about this we will understand tomorrow.
Yesterday you spiritual progress is not possible without initiation.
But now you say that if you please your spiritual master, there is no need for initiation also.
Why this contradictory statement?
So yes, we are taking initiation because Prabhupada has told it.
If Prabhupada tells do not take initiation, so we will not take initiation.
So why yesterday I told initiation is required because Prabhupada is recommending for all his disciples in general that initiation is required.
But in case of Shri George Harrison, Prabhupada made an exception.
Arjuna had to kill his guru was Dronacharya considered a spiritual master too.
Dronacharya taught the Pandavas Dhanurvidya.
And I'm not very sure because Prabhupada explains, as we have read in Bhagavad Gita,
that he did not impart spiritual instructions to them because they were Kshatriyas.
Instead of Brahmavidya, Dronacharya taught them Dhanurvidya.
So the Pandavas are direct associates of Krishna and Arjuna directly accepted Krishna as a spiritual master.
Drink Gopal tea available in Iskcon temple.
Somebody has given a nice suggestion. If you want to avoid tea, then you can drink Gopal tea.
I think Gopal tea, there is no that green tea, which we want to avoid.
So you can visit Iskcon temple and get that. In that you can try to leave. Good suggestion.
Prabhuji, how to know your aim of life? How to know yourself? What is the purpose of life?
So I explain this in every session. Please keep hearing the sessions.
And just to give one word answer to all your questions.
Aim of life is to engage in the loving devotional service of Krishna.
And loving devotional service to Krishna, it helps in self-realization.
You can know yourself. I am not telling Bhagavatam.
Gyanam, the knowledge, is the result of devotional service to Krishna.
What is the purpose of life?
The purpose and aim are the same things, to engage in loving devotional service of Krishna.
And thus stop our birth and death and go back to live with Krishna, back to Godhead.
It's a substitute. Okay, answer is there.
Prabhuji, would this class be continued on the topic of law of Karma?
As you asked for polling yesterday that it will take place in today's class only.
Yes, so many people personally told me. So yes, we will definitely going to continue polls not required.
And law of Karma also I will definitely take as a part of Jigyasa workshop.
As in the beginning of the class, you told about a force which insists us to do some activities which we really don't want to perform.
But if we do it because of some past Karma, then what are its consequences in this or next life?
So we discussed yesterday this entire thing.
So I'll share the recordings which are there on Google Drive and you can hear that thing.
So you'll get the answer. We are following Prabhupada.
Can now we trust our intellect? As long as we are under three modes of nature, we don't become Paramhansa.
You can never completely trust your intellect.
So always you have to use your intellect in understanding the instructions of spiritual masters.
So when you become Paramhansa, Paramhansa means when you realize laws of nature are not acting upon your mind and body.
You are completely free. Then you can trust your intellect.
Prabhupada told to chant 16 rounds, but we are not able to chant 16 rounds.
So will we fall from our spiritual life? There is no question of fall.
We have not even come to spiritual platform.
We are on material platform only if you are not chanting 16 rounds.
So when we chant 16 rounds, we follow these things very, very nicely.
Then slowly we will come to spiritual platform.
So our spiritual life has not even begun if we are not doing 16 rounds.
Prabhu, should we follow Kripa Siddhi or Sadhana Siddhi?
So we have to do our Sadhana very, very nicely and always aspiring for Kripa.
Kripa is required in both cases, but Kripa Siddhi is very, very rare, Bali Maharaj attained.
Without following rules and regulations, a person will become successful by Kripa, by this Siddhi.
So we always aspire for that. That is our mood.
And how a person will get Kripa? By following the instructions very, very nicely.
So even if Kripa Siddhi is not there, by doing Sadhana very nicely, Prabhupada will make a Sadhana Siddha.
My mind is distracted by all sorts of material goals and aspirations.
This makes focus on devotional service increasingly difficult.
At best it is mechanical. Please guide.
Yes, Krishna tells,
Those who are very much allured by material goals and aspirations,
they cannot have fixed focus on spiritual life.
But the easy thing is whatever goals we are pursuing,
the result of those goals, if we achieve, we can offer to Krishna.
So in this way, slowly we'll be able to become free from all these material modes of passion and ignorance.
So it may not be possible to get rid of all those things.
So that is why if your mind and body works in certain way, do that.
But the result you please offer to Krishna. Don't try to enjoy the results directly.
And chant and hear very, very nicely in association of devotees.
If you follow this, mind will become very, very focused upon Krishna.
Without very, very attentively chanting and hearing the names of Krishna
and having association of devotees, it is not possible.
So please do this and offer the results to Krishna.
According to Varnashrama, people having age like up to 25 age Brahmachari, then Grasta, Vanprastha, etc.
But in Treta Yuga and Satyug, people having their age in lakhs and thousands,
then their age is divided according to Varnashrama.
This I have not read that it is it as per the percentage of age or still it is as per this thing.
So I will try to get the clarification and I'll discuss in some future classes.
Hare Krishna Prabhu does following instructions of spiritual master without initiation also works the same.
No, initiation actually starts a person's spiritual life.
So after initiation, a person makes tremendous advancement and very quick advancement in spiritual life.
I'm not able to forget the delicious prasadam of our Aruli and Pavai folk.
Now being abroad, my tongue and mind are constantly searching for it here.
And sometimes I think I unintentionally forget to focus on Krishna and rather focus on prasadam.
Yes, the choice is yours. You chose England or UK instead of prasadam.
So what can we done?
Prabhupada's father, he rejected England and he told my son would be in India.
I want to make him servant of Radharani.
So he rejected his foreign education and all other things.
So choices are in future be wise in your choices and try to choose devotee association over material allurements.
And meanwhile, you can try to cook for yourself and offer and take and as soon as possible have devotee association.
Whom to thank in life if one has more than one spiritual master? Whom to thank in life?
Spiritual master who gives us deeksha, initiation, he can only be one.
Having more than one guru who gives deeksha, it is offensive.
It is very serious offense. Spiritual life will be spoiled if a person does that.
However, shiksha gurus, those gurus who give us instructions, they can be many.
But however, a person cannot have more than one deeksha guru who takes charge of a disciple to elevate him to spiritual life.
So there are many more questions.
Okay, one only last question.
Lord Ram said that we should always obey our parents order. If you are doing this means we are doing adharma.
My concern is I want to be devotee of Krishna completely.
They are forcing me to marry because I am single son.
So they are forcing and doing melodrama to get their wishes. Tell me what to do.
So this we discussed before also. We should follow spiritual master.
That instruction is highest and as long as the parents or other authorities,
their instruction is not contradictory to instruction of spiritual master and Krishna we should follow.
But if there is some contradiction, then instruction should be taken for spiritual master of spiritual master.
