So, Srila Prabhupada explains, Srila Prabhupada is our beloved spiritual master and the founder
acharya of the worldwide Hare Krishna movement, also known as ISKCON, International Society
for Krishna Consciousness. Prabhupada would quote this shloka many many times. It is mentioned
by Lord Brahma in very very significant prayers called Brahma Sahita. In that it is mentioned,
Ramadi Murtishu Kalaniyamena Tishthan, Nanavataram Akarod Bhuvaneshu Kintu, Krishna Swayam Sama Bhavat
Paramah Pumanyo Govindam Adipurisham Tamaham Bhajami. So, Lord Krishna, he appears in various forms.
And one of the most important form of Lord Krishna when he incarnates is Lord Ramachandra.
So, it is mentioned in the fourth chapter of Bhagavad Gita, verse number nine.
Janma Karma Chame Divyam Evam Yo Veti Tatvataha. Tyaktva Deham Punar Janma Nayati Maameti Sorjuna.
So, some devotees requested that Prabhuji please speak the pastimes of Lord Ramachandra on this auspicious day.
So, all the pastimes of Lord Ramachandra have been recorded in various books.
And the most authorised book is Ramayan, which has got 24000 verses. It is composed by Mahakavi Sri Valmiki Ji.
But the more popular version is Ramcharitmanas because it is in the local language and people understand it very very easily.
However, the authorised version is Valmiki Ramayan, which has got 24000 shlokas.
And all the pastimes of Lord Ramachandra are explained very very nicely in that book.
However, if you see Srila Prabhupada speaking on such occasions of the appearance day of various incarnations,
Lord Krishna, Srimati Radharani, Balramji, Nithyananda Prabhu, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu or Ram Navami, appearance of Lord Ramachandra.
Srila Prabhupada would seldom speak of the pastimes, rather he would speak more on the tattva.
Because many people, they have heard about the pastimes and the pastimes are definitely very important to understand.
But if a person does not know who is Lord Ramachandra, then the activities of Lord Ramachandra, he can take it just like any other person.
That is what people tell. Many people, they know there was a King Dashrath and King Dashrath had many queens and Kaushalya, Sumitra, Kaikeyi, the prime queens were there and Kaikeyi, she had got a boon which she reserved for a proper time that when the time comes, I'll ask you.
And then Kaikeyi asks and Lord Dashrath had to grant the boon because Kshatriya, once something comes out of his mouth, he has to fulfill.
So some kind of envy got set in the heart of Kaikeyi and then Kaikeyi thought, my son Bharat, he should become the king.
So what can I do? So let me send Lord Ramachandra to forest.
And then she asks this boon from the king, reminding him of his promise, which he had made once in a crucial time when he became very, very happy with the service of Kaikeyi.
And Lord Ramachandra, he is going to be coronated the next day.
And just like Lord Krishna was the life of the Vrajavasis, Lord Ramachandra was the life of the Ayodhya Vasis.
And they were very, very eagerly awaiting, oh, our beloved Lord, he'll become king tomorrow and he's going to become king.
But then suddenly the whole preparations are going on.
The entire kingdom, all the devotees over there, they were great lovers of Lord Ramachandra.
Many people would not eat anything unless they have seen the face of Lord Ramachandra.
And suddenly there is a news that Lord Ramachandra is not going to be the king, rather he's going to the forest.
And then Lord Ramachandra immediately accepted the instruction of his father.
Suppose this situation, we are put into any such situation that we are going to take over the company or the property of our father.
And suddenly our brother takes over everything and father tells us, son, you please go to jungle.
Let your brother enjoy this house or let your brother enjoy the company.
What will be our situation?
I will see you and brother also very nicely.
But this is not the Vedic culture.
Vedic culture means people would not worry about the results.
Because we are all servants of Krishna.
Because a person forgets that I am servant of Krishna, all the problems begin in his life.
A servant would live in the same room.
A servant will enjoy the same house.
The servant will enjoy the same car as that of his master.
Rather master may be living outside and traveling, servant actually enjoy the quarters.
But as long as he understands that he's servant, if he forgets that he's servant, then all problems of life will begin.
As soon as a person develops firm faith that I am servant of Krishna, servant of Lord Ramachandra, then there is no more misery in his life.
So some people tell, no, no, it is slavery what you are teaching us.
We should be free. We should be independent.
So Sheila Prabhupada explains that who is independent here?
Just like a great scam is happening in the world today in the name of women independence.
So somehow people could not understand the Vedic culture and Vedic culture was portrayed in a way that women were exploited and all these things were happening.
But no, that is not the case.
We can hear, see from this instance, Mother Sita, she was so qualified, there is no question of exploitation.
She was given the right. You choose your husband.
So everything depends upon the qualification.
But then a very important instruction is given here that how women, they always need great protection in society.
So all the various incarnations, they come here with a purpose.
The purpose is to, as we have been discussing in the last few classes, explaining to the living entities what is real happiness.
That is why the name of Lord Ramachandra is Ram.
What does this name mean?
So the name means Ramante yoginu anante satyananda chidatmani iti rama pade nasau param brahma abhidhiyate.
So we are all spirit souls.
We are different from this body.
Aham Brahmasmi, this we have been understanding in our Bhagavad Gita sessions.
Those who are not able to understand, they can kindly visit our website and hear the lectures.
We have been discussing this thing.
So I'm Brahma, I am Brahma, I am spirit soul.
So this understanding is the prime objective of human form of life.
And if a person wants to become happy, he has to understand that he is not the body.
And how a person can come to this understanding?
That is why the entire varnashrama system is designed.
If a person follows the systems of varnashrama very, very nicely, slowly he will be elevated
to the understanding that I am not the body.
So in varnashrama system, a person should not worry about the results that what will
bring me happiness, what would not bring me happiness.
Because whatever happiness we are enjoying now in this world, it is mithyananda.
It is false happiness.
So the yogis, they don't enjoy this false happiness.
Ramante yogino anante, the yogis, the spiritualist, the devotees.
So it should people should consider it that the devotees, the spiritualists, they apparently
are having a very, very miserable life.
Like somebody was asking why devotees don't marry people are so eager to marry to enjoy
the pleasures of life, the carnal pleasures.
But most of the devotees, they choose not to marry.
And the devotees, they are having very, very austere life.
They cannot eat outside, always eat the simple food which is cooked there in the temple offered
to the Lord, maintain very, very strict discipline in life, no money, no luxuries, no many comforts.
And why a devotee would undergo an earlier satyoga, those yogis have to do much more
Now the process is simple.
Earlier, they have to do a lot of austerity.
They have to sit on a mountain, on a stone in the jungle.
They cannot stay at home.
If you have to follow spiritual life, you have to leave home.
This was the process in all the ages.
But a special thing, a boon has been given to us in Kali Yuga, sthanai sthitashruti gatam
tanuvan mano bhi, wherever you are, simply keep on chanting and hearing the names of
Lord Krishna, Lord Rama.
That's it.
But devotees would undergo rigorous austerity.
So why a devotee is suffering?
Does this fellow not want to enjoy in life?
No, they are actually enjoying.
And what kind of pleasure they are enjoying?
So it is told, ramante yogino anante, ramante means enjoy.
The yogis, they do enjoy.
And what kind of pleasure they enjoy, ramante yogino anante.
The pleasure which the devotees enjoy, it is ananta, ananta means unlimited.
The pleasure that we enjoy is very, very temporary and flickering.
And those pleasures are mithyananda, mithya means false and illusory.
What is the meaning of false pleasure?
The understanding given is just like when you are dreaming, nayanjyoti, you dream.
Yes, all of us dream.
So Prabhupada tells if somebody is telling he doesn't dream, he is foolish.
He doesn't remember that he has not dreamt, but everyone dreams.
So there are various stages of our consciousness.
So there is wakefulness, as we are now, and then there is swapna vastha, and then there
is susupti.
So when a person goes to deep sleep, susupti, he has to pass through swapna vastha, dreamy
situation.
So everyone dreams.
And in dream, we may enjoy, oh, yes, now I've become very rich.
And I've got a lot of money, or I've got some examination, or I'm enjoying with a beautiful
boy or girl, and I'm enjoying lies, gulabjamus, and I'm eating and eating like this, a person
can dream.
But then this is mithyananda, there is no gulabjamun over there, you'll not become
rich, sir.
It is only a dream.
It is temporary.
This is called mithyananda.
Similarly, the pleasure that we enjoy here, these are also mithya pleasures.
As per our mind and body, few things we find pleasurable, and few things we don't find
pleasurable.
So we discuss always following the footsteps of Prabhupada.
Prabhupada is pig.
For pigs, sleeping in the drain is great enjoyment, oh, so nice, such nice water it is.
Crow, crow will always go to the filthy place, and swans, they float in clear waters.
So what is good for a swan is very bad for crow, crow ko saaf paani mile jao gaya, re
kahan rag diya mishko gandi jaga mein, let me go to that nice thing.
Pig, if you pull him out and put him clear water, again he'll go to the dirty place.
This is the nature of pig.
So pig finds that water very nice, pig finds stool very very tasty, oh thank you sir, I've
got a feast now eating stool, but for us it is abominable.
So in a similar fashion, some people eat meat, they are very fond of meat, other people in
India will find many vegetarians from birth, so they will puke simply by the smell of meat.
So one thing which is tasty, it should be tasty for all.
So actually there is no taste, no pleasure in this material world.
The perceptions of pleasure are created for the living entity.
When the living entity becomes very envious of the reality that God, I have to follow
God, I don't want to follow God, just like we were discussing yesterday.
Why parents are not allowing me to play a computer game?
And he may shout and sometimes the children, they kill their parents, as it has happened
in the news, because they stop the enjoyment of the child playing computer game.
In a similar fashion, when the living entity becomes mad at God, becomes envious of God,
and the living entity wants to enjoy independently in his own way, then he is put into this illusory
situation, where he is given a chance, you do proper karma, you can become like God,
you can become Brahma, you can enjoy.
Just like a mad man, he is given tranquilizers so that he doesn't create disturbance.
In a similar fashion, all the enjoyments of this world are mithya.
Mithya means we can understand, it depends upon mind and body.
Few things are pleasant for the body, few things are unpleasant.
And apart from this, all the other pleasures which are but mental concoction.
I met with few people and those people started discussing, oh, IIT, IIT, IIT is very good.
And I thought I have to crack IIT, then I will be happy.
And if I did not crack, then I will be sad.
So why this happiness and distress has come because you associated with some people, Mithyananda.
If you had never met some people who appreciate IIT, this exam of IIT would not have disturbed
you, isn't it?
Similarly for the doctors, similarly for the various successful people, as per their calculations,
they think, oh, this thing is good, this thing is very nice, this thing is.
So Srila Prabhupada gives very nice examples.
Children are very, very fond of toys and these things.
But there was a child of one devotee couple.
And somebody came, relatives and somebody, they'll bring something for the pleasure of
children.
They gifted him a toy, I think toy car or something.
And immediately the small child of devotees, he started reading Maya, Maya, Maya.
This is Maya.
So he's not taking pleasure in the toy car because he has got a different training.
So as per our training, we think of this thing is pleasant in this world.
This thing is not pleasant.
Actually, it is only Mithyananda.
In dream, we get a subtle body and we enjoy subtle objects.
Here we get a different body and we enjoy gross objects.
Both these happinesses are Mithya and it lasts only for a very, very short while.
And we are never satisfied by these things.
The greatest pleasure of material world is sexual pleasure for which everyone is running
around chasing that pleasure.
But in a few minutes it is over and a person is never satisfied.
Body may become old, but mind doesn't become old.
Mind still demands.
Prabhupada would tell when I go to the West in India, those clubs were not there at that
time.
So I see in the clubs, old people, 60 or 65 years old, they pay money and go to the bars
to see women dancing with scantily dressed clothes.
So why?
Because this body has become old, but mind has not become old.
Body is not supporting the desires.
That is the nature of this material world, material body.
There is no satisfaction.
The pleasure is Mithya, first of all, and it lasts only for a very short while.
So that is why the real pleasure is the pleasure enjoyed by the yogis.
So only because they are having such high grade of pleasure, these lower pleasures,
they don't allure the devotees.
Of course, in initial stages, when a person has begun spiritual life, there would be some
attractions.
But as he advances in spiritual life, he becomes less and less attracted by all these things.
And when a devotee is completely absorbed in Krishna, then Yamanacharya tells spiritual
master of Ramanujacharya, very nice Lokashila Prabhupada quotes many times.
So when people follow spiritual life, it is very, very difficult to follow the regulative
principle of Brahmacharya, not doing illicit sex.
Very difficult, gross level at mental level.
But Yamanacharya, who was a king before, later he became a pure devotee, an amazing spiritual
master.
He tells, when I was king, I had a lot of opportunity of enjoying with opposite gender.
And when I think of such carnal pleasures, such association, because I am always absorbed
in thinking of the lotus feet of Krishna in my heart, I am getting newer and newer pleasures
by this meditation.
The same lotus feet, I think, and I'm getting newer pleasures every day.
So when such thoughts come of my past life, and I think of what I have done, my mouth
curls in distaste.
And I spit at this thought, oh, what is this pleasure?
The greatest pleasure, which the big leaders, so called CXOs of the top most countries of
the world, they are mad after this pleasure.
Very difficult to control.
But this person, what kind of pleasure he's having, that this highest pleasure of this
physical body, his mouth curls in distaste upon this pleasure.
So human life is meant for that pleasure.
Just imagine what is that pleasure of spiritual life, that the highest pleasure of this material
world, it becomes very, very distasteful.
So all the otherwise eating, mating, sleeping, defending, these pleasures are available in
all the forms of life.
Human life, we should not waste to enjoy the pleasures which we can enjoy in anybody.
You are going to get some bodies and pleasure of eating, mating, sleeping, it is available
in all the forms.
However, the spiritual pleasure, we can only relish in this human form of life.
In order to give this pleasure to us, to the living entities, because although we have
gone mad, but still we are sons of God, God comes and reincarnates here.
Over and over again, he tells my living entities, why you are enjoying this illusory and temporary
pleasure, which will never satisfy you.
Try to enjoy this pleasure which the yogis enjoy.
Ramante yogino anante satyanande chidatmani, iti rama pade nasau param brahm abhidhiyate.
That is why param brahm, we are called brahm.
So there is brahm and there is param brahm.
If you have to understand that I am brahm, I am spirit soul, a person has to be a brahmana.
What is a brahmana?
So the entire Vedic society, Vedic culture, people were aware that this is the aim of
life.
That is why even when the children would play snakes and ladders, the game like that, so
it is called Vaikunth Palli in South Indian language.
And it is called Moksha Paati in Sanskrit.
So the final stage 100, that was called Vaikuntha.
It means the snakes and ladders, this game, a person knows, child knows, ultimately I
have to reach Vaikuntha or Moksha Paati, I have to get liberation.
And all the snakes in the snakes and ladders, they represented vices, lust, anger, greed,
avarice, enviousness, cheating, adultery, and all these things, they are vices.
And the ladders, they represent the virtues, simplicity, honesty, truthfulness, tolerance,
forgiveness, charity, penance.
So these are ladders.
So a child is very, very clear.
This is what I'm supposed to do.
And the ladder guides him to a particular place.
If you follow this austerity, you will reach Chandraloka.
You follow this thing, tapasya, you will reach Brahma Loka.
So entire life is very, very clear to the boy.
So if you follow this thing, this is your destiny.
You have to save yourself from these snakes and ultimately have to become liberated.
So in order to help a living entity cross over this process of repeated birth and death,
suffering from taking various bodies and working very hard just to enjoy a pleasure which is
false and never satisfying our heart, the society was divided into eight sections, four
spiritual orders and four social orders.
So this body is made up of matter.
Mind is also material substance and we are spirit souls.
So that is why body also has to be taken care.
So spiritual life is not some utopian phenomena or impractical thing.
Anybody at any stage with whatever physique and intelligence he has got, he can advance
towards life perfection.
And to this end, who has designed this one ashrama system, democracy, capitalism, federalism,
communism has been designed by some people, mortals.
However, Lord Krishna reveals in Bhagavad Gita, Chaturvarnaam, Mayashrishtam, Gunakarmavibhagashah.
This I have created this one ashrama system.
So in this system, those people who are very tamasic, as we discussed in the last class,
our faith, our understanding, everything depends upon three modes.
So those who are in the lowermost mode, they were called Shudras.
Shudra means who is tamasic.
Shudra doesn't belong to a family.
It is wrong.
This one ashrama system became caste system, which is not the actual understanding.
So those people who are in lower modes, who are tamasic, tamasic means the person does
not have an aptitude for inquiry about the absolute truth, understand what is the aim
of life.
He is simply happy satisfying his mind and body and he's lazy and he does not keep great
cleanliness.
So he's called a Shudra.
He's always dependent upon others.
He cannot become independent in life.
So they were called Shudras, no interest in education, showing no proper character.
Only one quality Shudra is supposed to display, that is faithfulness.
He should be faithful to the master.
So these people only would take up jobs in the ashrama system, Shudra, tamasic.
And those who are mixed with Tamoguna and Rajoguna, mode of passion and ignorance, they
were called Vaishyas, farmers and traders.
They would do farming and trading, cow protection, Krishiguraksha, Vanidyam.
And those people who are not in Tamoguna, but mainly in Rajoguna, Rajasic mode of passion,
they became the they were called Kshatriyas.
They would do administration.
They would collect taxes and they would provide the civic amenities and protect the people,
fight the wars.
The highest category, which was very, very rare, which is only in Satvoguna, they were
called the Brahmanas.
So Krishna tells, Janma Karmachame Divyam evam yoveti tatvataha tyakpa deham punar janma
nayeti.
How this process of liberation, freedom from birth and death can be attained when a person
scientifically understands that who is Lord Ramachandra, although he behaves like a human
being, but he's not an ordinary human being.
When Lord Ramachandra sent his forces to figure out where is mother Sita and he got the news
that Sita is across the ocean and immediately summoned the god of ocean, please come out
and clear the way, clear the path for me.
You take your waters away from my path.
I want to claim my wife back.
And the ocean did not respond.
Who is this fellow asking me something?
So after some time when Lord Ramachandra waited, I think one, two or three days he waited.
And even after that, when ocean did not turn up, Lord Ramachandra became very, very furious
and simply by his gaze, the whole ocean started boiling, started heating up and all the living
entities became very perturbed ocean is heating up.
And then ocean God realized, oh, this is no ordinary man.
His supreme personality himself, who can make my entire waters heated up simply by his me
by his gaze.
So it is not easy to understand God.
Even the great demigods are bewildered.
So that is why we are all here to understand Bhagavad Gita, understand God and his past
times.
But in order to understand the spiritual subject matter, just to understand, I am not the body,
a person has to be satvik on the Satvaguna.
Only Brahman can perfectly understand that I am not the body.
Just like a child, how much ever he may try, he cannot understand going to school is very
important.
Not playing always is suggested.
He thinks going to school is very, very miserable.
Why they are pushing?
He cannot understand, has no brains.
In a similar fashion, a tamasic person cannot understand higher subject matters.
So he is conditioned by ignorance, foolishness, Rajasic person.
He has got some intelligence, but uses intelligence to satisfy his senses.
And when we are mad after satisfying the senses, we all realize in satisfying our senses, we
become mad at times.
That is why many, many crimes also do happen.
So Rajasic person gets carried away by the desires of the senses.
So he also cannot understand truth.
And a satvik person, because he knows the laws of nature, he is very regulated in his
habit and satvik persons only aim of life is to understand what is truth, what is truth,
what is truth.
Who is our origin?
Who am I?
I am different from this body than who has put me in this body.
What is my source?
What is the purpose of creation?
He only wants to do research about this thing.
So Brahmana is very, very happy.
If you do tatvajjigyaasa, have a simple life, then you will be very, very happy.
And Brahmana gets conditioned by this happiness.
So Brahmana is very, very peaceful.
And because he is peaceful, he also does not endeavor to engage in service of Lord.
And there is very nice shloka in the Garun Purana.
We all read Garun Purana when people die.
This part of the Antim Sanskar, the last rites.
So Garun Purana tells Brahmana naam sahasrebya, out of many, many thousands of Brahmanas satriyajya
vishishyate.
A person who can do yajna, many, many Brahmanas are there who are on satvik platform and they
understand that I am not this body.
But very few of those Brahmanas, out of many, many Brahmanas, few of them can do yajnas.
So yajna, doing yajna is very, very important.
A person would do self-realization simply by doing yajnas.
All the fulfillments, requirements of life can be fulfilled by yajna.
You want material openness, do this yajna.
You want physical strength, do this yajna.
You want to defeat your enemy, do this yajna.
You want to have 1000 children, do this yajna.
You want to have children, you're not having children.
Do this putreshti yajna.
So yajna is a very nice system, technical system, which is explained in Bhagavad Gita
also to fulfill one's desires and being happy very materially.
And also for spiritual perfection in Treta Yoga, this process was recommended.
However, a Brahmana has to be very, very qualified so that he can ignite the yajnic fire simply
by chanting mantras.
So this qualification was very, very rare.
And out of Brahmana, you'll find a person who can do yajnas.
And out of many such thousands of Brahmanas who can do yajna, you'll find Vedanta Paraga.
You'll find a person who is having knowledge of Vedanta, the conclusion of all the Vedas.
And then it is told Vedanta Paraga, out of crores of such people, such Brahmanas who
have understood Vedanta, the conclusion of all Vedas, you'll find one Vaishnava, Vishnu
Bhakta.
And it is told, only a devotee can know me in truth.
So thus we can understand how difficult it is to know God in truth.
A person, first of all, it is difficult to become Brahmana.
Brahmana does not mean by caste.
In Kalyuga, everyone is Shudra.
Hardly very, very few Vaishyas, no Kshatriyas and no Brahmanas.
Kalav Shudra Sambhava.
So Brahmana means very peaceful.
Senses are perfectly under control.
Mind is under control.
Gyanam Vijnanam Astikyam.
He has strong faith in the Vedas.
He's convinced I am not the body.
So he doesn't waste time in satisfying the body.
Rather, he does Brahma Jigyasa.
Who am I? From where I have come here?
What is absolute truth?
But he also can understand just Brahma Jyoti, the light which is coming out of
the body of Krishna.
He understands there is some energy and we are part of that energy.
We are of the same nature.
But that energy is coming from Param Brahma.
This people do not understand.
And what is that Param Brahma?
Iti Ram Pade Na Asau Param Brahma Abhidhiyate.
So he is called Sri Ram Chandra.
Lord Ram Chandra is a person, personality, another form of Lord Krishna.
In order to enjoy the particular pastimes of being a king,
Lord Krishna expands himself in such form.
And he is called Param Brahma.
We are small sparks, spirit souls, and his infinite spirit soul, also a person.
And the yogis meditate upon that Lord Ram Chandra.
So human life is meant to understand God.
And understanding of God can only be developed when a person even surpasses
the Satva guna and comes to should the Satva guna.
And how a person can do that should the Satva guna?
Simply by engaging in devotional service of Krishna.
So a very rare opportunity has been given to us now.
We are not qualified to follow this slow process.
Behave like a Shudra, then become Vaishya, then become Kshatriya, then become Brahmana.
And one day you'll be able to perform yajna.
Then after one day or maybe next life, you'll be able to understand Vedanta.
And then finally, one day you'll become Vishnu Bhakta.
You'll become Vaishnava and then you will understand God.
Then your process of birth and death will stop.
Then you will enjoy unlimited happiness.
All this process has been cut short by this Rajavidya,
what Lord Krishna explains in the 9th chapter.
Sattvatam kirtayanto maam.
Krishna explains.
Yatantash chadrvita.
We'll see this shloka very soon in the next class tomorrow.
So Lord Krishna tells, always keep on chanting my holy name.
Just like Lord Ram Chandra, he took avtar.
I think you would have received the message.
So the description of Ramaraja is given.
When Lord Ram Chandra, he appeared here.
There is no need to arrange, fix these things.
Fix corruption, fix disease, fix old age, fix all these things.
Simply let the Lord descend and become the King.
As soon as the Lord becomes the King,
everything gets adjusted automatically.
So when Lord Ram Chandra became the King,
as you would have received on WhatsApp or post,
which just came in the evening, Bhagavata mentions,
there was no disease, no old age,
no physical or mental agony at all, and even no death.
Death also will come and ask,
aapko chalna hai ki yahi pe seva karna hai Ram ka?
Because when you die, then also you'll serve Lord Ram only.
So you want to serve there and you want to serve here,
you please tell me.
So death also will come with folded hands,
ki aapko chalna hai toh batao,
I am waiting whenever you want to come.
This is Ramaraja.
Complete freedom from birth, death, old age and disease.
Death cannot touch the pure devotees.
And Srila Prabhupada explains very nicely in the purport.
The same Lord Ram Chandra has incarnated.
He came as Ram Avatar in Treta Yuga,
and he has come as Naam Avatar in Kali Yuga,
Kali Kaale Naam Rupi Krishna Avatar.
So in Kali Yuga, the same Lord,
with same potency, with same pleasure,
Ramante Yogino Anante,
the pleasure which Yog is derived by meditating upon Ram,
that pleasure we can derive by meditating upon
the name of Ram in Kali Yuga very, very easily.
So just see, no scientist, nobody, no company can offer you
this return, this gift.
And what is that gift?
Freedom from all the miseries of life.
So in Kali Yuga, we have to serve Lord Ram Chandra,
Lord Krishna, by chanting and hearing the holy names.
And simply by serving the Naam Avatar,
if all of us start chanting the holy name,
offenselessly, purely if we chant the name
of Lord Ram Chandra, Lord Krishna,
then the name is not different from God himself.
And when God comes here,
everything gets adjusted automatically.
Just like Trump visited India,
and then Gujarat got transformed,
and the world got transformed,
and the roads are very nice,
people are dancing on the street,
they would be poor otherwise.
What he sees, and many, many people
are dancing on the street side,
and all the slums got covered, and it is so beautiful.
So when God comes here, the whole nature,
which is servant of Krishna,
arranges herself so very much beautifully.
So we don't have to fix the problems of life,
simply invoke Lord Ram Chandra.
If not in society, then in our life.
If you simply develop loving relationship,
you become servant of this holy name of Lord Ram Chandra,
Hare Krishna Mahamantra, we can enjoy,
we can even now live in the same Ram Rajya,
complete freedom from birth, death,
old age, and disease.
So Lord Ram Chandra, he invented today.
He's always there.
He is visible in Treta Yuga.
That is why it is called Appearance Dhyavir Bhava Diwas.
Lord Ram Chandra becomes visible here.
Just like the sun is always there,
now we cannot see the sun.
It does not mean the sun is dead,
as the Aborigines would think.
Similarly, Lord Ram Chandra, Lord Krishna are always present.
And those people who rise above material
to spiritual platform,
they are always seeing the pastimes of Lord Ram Chandra.
So it is my humble request to all of you.
All the pastimes of Lord Ram Chandra,
Lord Krishna will be revealed.
If we simply keep on very, very attentively,
offenselessly, without material attachments,
we can chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra
always insistently throughout the day.
We can attain that stage where we are always absorbed
in the pastimes of the Supreme Personality.
And then we will also attain such great pleasure
in front of which all the material pleasures
will be very, very distasteful to us.
With this, I would like to finish today's session.
And the devotees who like, they can carry on.
I will stay online till 9.15 for question answer session.
So if any of you have any questions,
you can please put forth.
Hare Krishna, Hare Bhol,
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna.
How can we follow yoga system in this modern age
without disturbance?
Is the question asked?
Actually, all the disturbance will begin in your life
when you start following the yoga process.
So just like small boy Prahlad Maharaj,
as soon as he became devotee,
everyone became against him and his own father.
So don't think when you follow yoga,
there will be no disturbance.
A lot of disturbance will be there.
The Maya, the illusory energies,
testing potency of Lord Krishna, Durga Devi.
As soon as a person starts practicing yoga,
he will have a lot of disturbance.
First disturbance would be from mind and body.
Old habits will disturb you a lot.
Then the family members may not be favorable.
Country may not be favorable.
Just like in China, it is so difficult to follow
in many other places.
But nevertheless, keep on sticking to Lord service
and he will clear everything.
Simply follow the things very, very nicely.
Attentively chant and hear the holy names.
Read Bhagavad Gita very nicely.
All the disturbance would go away.
This is the solution which Srila Prabhupada give
to all the devotees to solve all the disturbance.
When God comes into your life,
so some devotee told,
Prabhupada, how can I solve the problem of lust?
It is so much disturbing in my spiritual life.
So Prabhupada told you simply follow
the rules and regulations which I have given you.
And what to speak of lust,
the father of lust also cannot do anything.
So just chant and hear attentively
and everything will be, disturbance will go away.
Prabhuji, in today's world,
are there such Brahmins who can do such Yajnas
and can they really work?
Practically, they are not found among the masses,
but they exist.
If you find on top of Himalayas,
such sages are still there.
Prabhupada would tell when Kumbh Mela happens,
they come down and you'll find them
that they are very, very young.
They will appear just like young boys,
but they may be 700, 800 or even many hundreds of years old,
but they have kept their body in such a youthful stage.
So such Brahmins, such Yogis are there,
but they don't mix with public much.
So practically, they are not existing among us.
Hare Krishna, Prabhuji,
is there any relation of Hare Krishna Mahamantra
with that of meditation?
Yes, Hare Krishna Mahamantra is a meditation.
Don't take it very lightly.
When we are chanting, it is Naam Avatar,
same Lord Ramachandra.
Suppose Lord Ram comes in front of you,
how much attentive we will be and respectful we will be.
In a similar fashion, we should be very attentive
and respectful to receive this Naam Avatar
and develop relationship with Him
by serving as much as possible throughout the day.
Always keep constant association with Him.
Just like we want to develop friendship with someone,
we keep on messaging, try to speak to them.
We go out to eat with them.
In a similar fashion,
keep on constant association by chanting.
And with great attention, we should hear,
this is meditation recommended for Kali Yoga.
Attentively chanting and hearing the names.
Prabhuji, why didn't Lord Ram continue with Ramaraja?
Because of people like us,
we are decoits of the first order.
If Ramaraja is there, we cannot fulfill all our desires,
which people do now, watch the movies
and do all the nonsense dance and these things.
So all the movies, dramas would be about Lord Ramachandra.
All the eating would be only prasadam.
And we cannot eat non-veg and all these things
were not allowed.
So some souls have got wrong desires
and Krishna is so kind.
He gives us chance to facilitate our wrong desires.
Thus Ramaraja was finished
and Lord Ramachandra took all his devotees
along with him to the spiritual world.
And chast was given to us.
Now fulfill, try to fulfill your desires, get frustrated.
And I'll come as Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
try to instruct you again.
Hare Krishna, Prabhuji.
People who are Brahman by the caste
is real Brahman in Kalyug.
Can any other caste people become Brahmana?
People who are Brahman by the caste,
there is nothing called Brahman by caste.
What is the definition of Brahman?
Krishna tells,
chatur vanyam maya shrishtam guna karma vibhagashah.
I have divided society into Brahman, kshatriya,
vaishya, shudra, etc. basis, guna and karma,
their qualities and their actions.
What is the quality of Brahmana?
Satyam, he will always speak truth.
Can we always speak truth?
Even if enemy comes and asks,
some thief comes and asks,
sir, where is the money?
Brahman should tell it is here inside,
this much money is there.
Can we tell that?
Not possible.
So Brahmana should be so truthful.
He understands that my happiness and distress
is fixed as per my destiny.
I am simply supposed to follow my duty
to attain self-realization.
So I should always be truthful.
Satyam, first thing itself is very difficult to follow.
Then shama and dama, mind and senses,
are perfectly under control of a Brahmana.
Our mind and senses are very loose.
And he is very, very simple.
Gyanam vijnanam astikyam has strong faith in the Vedas.
Patan, patan, yajan, yajan, dhan, pratigya,
this is the only work of Brahmana.
Brahmana cannot do job at all.
Where is a person who is not doing job?
Only patan, patan, understanding absolute truth
and explaining absolute truth to others.
Worshipping God, yajan, yajan,
and teaching others how to worship.
Dhan, pratigya, accepting charity from others,
not doing any job.
Brahmana will only live on charity.
And then...
If he gets more money, immediately he'll donate.
Just he will keep money for that day.
Next day, again, he will go out begging.
So this is the duty of Brahmana,
who is person who is doing like this.
So that is why in Kalyuga it is told,
kalau shudra sambhava.
In Kalyuga, everyone is shudra.
However, by following Krishna consciousness,
a person can not only become Brahmana,
but he can surpass Brahman to become Vaishnava,
Vishnu Bhakta,
which is the topmost stage as per the scriptures.
So anybody can become Brahman by becoming Vaishnava.
Otherwise, as per caste, everyone is shudra.
There is no other thing existing.
Prabhuji, mera marg darshan kareye,
mujhe apne krodh par sayam nahi reh paraaha hai.
Kya faida Krishna conscious se jodhne ka
aur mantra jaapne ka?
Hmm.
Prabhu, itna mantra jaap liya,
abhi bhi gussa aati hai.
Toh kya matlab yeh saf karne ka?
Toh yeh waise hi baat hai ki,
bacha bole,
Pitaaji, 10 saal se par raha hoon,
kaap paise milenge?
Kam naukri lagegi?
Wait karo, 10 saal se kuch nahi hota hai.
22 saal tak parna parta hai minimum.
Then you will get something.
So, do paise kamane ke liye,
hum 22 saal ka education lete hain.
Aak Krishna consciousness ki success humko immediately chahiye,
wo bhi bina guru ko perfectly surrender kiye,
so it is not possible.
Yes, success is possible in a minute in Krishna consciousness.
Sara krodh, Sara everything finish ho jayega,
but we should be serious enough.
Are we serious enough to do it?
Then it will be possible.
We can ask for ourself.
So, we have to have patience.
Everything takes time.
Prabhupada gives example,
if a woman thinks immediately I want child,
how is it possible?
Yes, you have married,
so child will also come automatically.
Wait at least for nine months.
Everything takes time.
So, be patient.
Simply by following this Krishna consciousness,
it is not a new process.
For hundreds and thousands of years,
people have been following from the time of Valmiki.
What to speak of as Valmiki was a killer.
Isn't it?
He was such a fallen person that he was not able to chant.
At least hum Bhagawan ka naam le pa rahe hain.
He was so sinful, Bhagawan ka naam nahi aara tha Ram.
Toh unhone kaha mara, mara, mara, mara, mara, mara, mara, mara.
Then it became Ram.
And he became a pure devotee,
composer of Ramayana, such an exalted devotee.
So have patience.
This is very tested process.
Prabhuji, why we don't consider
Sri Ramcharitmanas as authoritative?
Even Lord Shiva had authorized it
as Ramcharitmanas history says.
The author himself says,
that I am writing this Sri Goswami Tulsidas,
who is a very famous devotee.
He himself tells that I am writing this
in glorification of Lord Ramchandra as a poetry.
So few things, few discrepancies are there.
One thing is that in Ramcharitmanas,
there is a tinge of Mayavada, impersonalism in that.
And there is a tinge of caste system also in that,
which we are discussing now.
That son of Brahman only can be Brahman like that.
So these things are not authorized
as per Ramayana and as per the other Vedas.
So that is why we recommend read Ramayana,
which is in Sanskrit having 24,000 verses.
Hare Krishna, Prabhuji.
Prabhuji, in today's world,
are there such Brahmins who can do?
Please don't post questions over and over again,
because I have to scroll much.
Prabhuji, how to engage in devotional service to Lord?
By chanting and hearing the names.
Lord comes in a certain avatar,
so that we can worship Him.
Now Lord has come in the Naam avatar,
so that we can worship Him
by chanting and hearing attentively.
So we have to respect the mood of Lord
in which He has appeared.
Dhanvat, Pranam, Prabhu.
How to overcome sex drive very hard?
Yes, as we discussed, it is very hard,
but Yamunacharya has told,
yadavadhimamachetakrishnapadaravinde.
So by chanting and hearing Hare Krishna Mahamantra,
you will start getting absorbed
in meditating upon the lotus feet of Krishna.
And when such meditation intensifies,
all the other drives will go away.
More guidance on practical things
you can take from the devotee whom you are in touch with.
Could I fast and complete 16 rounds?
I could fast and complete 16 rounds,
but what to ask if God comes?
If God comes, we should simply ask one thing,
please engage me in your devotional service.
And not that if He comes,
God has come already in the form of His holy name.
Aap borne aapne 16 round kar diya,
now what to do if God comes?
God has come already.
Those 16 rounds, we associated with God personally.
So this faith we have to develop that God has come already
and God is so nice and so merciful.
As soon as you chant, He dances on your tongue.
So with this faith,
we have to associate throughout the day,
God is available, millo.
I am available throughout the day, no appointments.
So we have to have this understanding
that this Hare Krishna Mahamantra is avatar of God.
When we chant with this faith,
then we make tremendous advancement.
Thank you for your valuable association,
Most welcome that in this corona epidemic difficult situation.
It's not difficult situation at all.
The thing is, we think the harm for the body is harm
and the pleasure of body is pleasure for the soul.
No, what is death?
That is no consideration at all.
This is the first instruction,
second chapter of Bhagavad Gita we will discuss maybe sometime.
In second chapter, this is the first instruction,
first instruction when Krishna spoke something to Arjuna,
these words came out of Krishna's mouth.
A learned man does not mourn for anything which is living or dead.
Means he does not mourn at all.
Either for the living or for the dead.
There is nothing called life and death.
There is simply dress.
You change dress, enter another dress.
Where is the difficulty?
Anyway, you have to give up the dress,
give up today or tomorrow.
But the purpose of human life is at the time of death,
I should be completely absorbed in the thoughts of Lord Krishna,
Lord Ramachandra.
That is success.
Then no more birth.
Otherwise, death is not an issue.
Nothing is difficult for a devotee.
Prabhu, what do you mean by offenseless chanting?
How can someone commit offense while chanting?
Chanting should by itself be considered free of offenses.
The holy name of Krishna is pure,
free of all offenses and material contamination.
But we are not able to chant it purely.
So there are 10 offenses.
You can search on the Internet 10 offenses against chanting the holy names of Lord.
And then you will understand.
And so I'll give you some examples of offenses.
First offense is to blaspheme the devotees who have dedicated their lives
in propagating the holy name of the Lord.
So I chant the names of Krishna very nicely,
but I find fault in devotees and criticize them.
Then Krishna does not like it.
This is offense.
The incarnation of holy name will never tolerate somebody insulting his servants.
So holy name will not be pleased.
So even though you are chanting holy name,
you will not receive knowledge because holy name is not very pleased with you.
So this is offense.
And like this, there are 10 offenses you read.
You will understand by these things, holy name becomes
he doesn't become pleased.
So it is an offense.
If we keep on chanting 16 rounds and following four regulative principles at the time of death,
if you forget him, then again, we have to take birth again.
If you follow Krishna consciousness nicely,
you're trying your best to remember Krishna.
Ninety nine percent chance is there that you will remember Krishna if you have followed sincerely.
But sudden that nuclear bomb fell on my head only.
So there is no time to think to chant Hare Krishna Mahamantra.
So part is Krishna will think of you.
Krishna is not ungrateful.
So our process is very nice.
If all four brothers were expansion of Balaram,
then the incarnation of Lord Ram is so opulent.
I don't understand this Lord Ramchandra perform last rites of Garuda,
not Garuda.
Should we perform last rites of animals for which can they get liberation directly?
He performed for Jatayu.
Jatayu is different.
Garuda is different.
It was Jatayu.
So Lord Ramchandra performed last rites for Jatayu.
Jatayu was no ordinary bird.
Jatayu was the king of all the vultures.
And Lord Ramchandra accepted him as his father and performed.
However, for animals, we don't have at least it is not in my knowledge.
I have not heard from Prabhupada.
If you come across any such thing in the Vedas, please share with me.
The rights are mainly meant for the human beings.
And what is the meaning of offering results to Krishna in Karma Yoga and how to do that?
Offering results to Krishna results means when you do some activity, you get some result.
You'll get some money.
You'll get some property out of your work.
Now you use that in the service of Krishna.
So you can have a nice temple of Krishna so that many people in your location can come
and visit and make spiritual advancement.
Or you distribute prasadam, which is offered to Krishna simply by eating.
People would make spiritual advancement or you publish print books, distribute Bhagavad
Gita to others.
The best service, however, is engaging your money in the preaching mission of Krishna.
People are suffering only because they don't have knowledge of God.
So when you spend money in assisting the people who are spreading this mission, then that
is the best service of your money.
So I can share our account number also with you.
Or wherever you find that this person is genuinely spreading the glories of Lord Krishna, spreading
the signs of God, Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita, he is most dear to me.
So engaging money in this preaching work is the highest form of service.
Otherwise, in any way, spend in temple worship, make temples, distribute prasadam, celebrate
festivals, invite people, connect to Krishna Consciousness.
That is also Krishna service.
Prabhuji, in today's world, are there such Brahmins who can do?
I told you as today's world, they are practically non-existent.
How to forget crush?
Remember Krishna.
All the remembrance of crush will be crushed.
So the more you chant and hear nicely Hare Krishna Mahamantra, all these things will
be cleared from the heart.
Krishna is sitting in the heart and he gives relief to the devotee of all the troubles.
It is said that Krishna got birth from Shiv birth as in Shiv Bhagawan is the greatest
and Krishna Bhagawan is just one of the group of Shiv.
OK, so the question is some people tell that Krishna or Lord Rama, he has appeared from
Lord Shiva.
So this statement is not supported by the Shastras and we can see from the pastimes
of Lord, sorry, of Lord Ramchandra also, Ravana was a very great devotee of Shiva and so was
Banasur also very great devotees of Shiva.
But when they were fighting with Lord Ramchandra, Banasur was fighting with Lord Krishna.
Even Lord Shiva came to fight as a matter of duty.
He understood his Supreme Lord.
He took the side of Banasur because he had promised, but he could not do anything.
When he was praying, Parvati told that your great devotees praying for your help.
Why don't you help?
So Lord Shiva tells if Lord Rama has decided to kill someone who can save.
So thus it is evident.
But Krishna's devotee, no power in the world could disturb the devotees of Krishna.
That is why we have the instances of Prahlad Maharaj, Dhruv Maharaj.
We have recent instance of the Goswami's Haridas Thakur, how he was attempted to be killed.
We have instance of Mirabai and so many other things.
The devotee of the Lord is not disturbed by any force.
This means he has surrendered to the supreme power because no power of the world is disturbing
a devotee.
Ravana was constantly under disturbance.
I want this woman also, that woman also, I want Sita also, I want other woman also.
So because Lord Shiva is not supreme Lord, we have come from God.
So as soon as we get connected to the God example, given is that a finger, automatically
the finger becomes nourished.
So as soon as we engage in God's service, we should be completely satisfied.
That is the design.
So the devotees of Lord Shiva, Ravana offered his head to Lord Shiva, such an amazing devotee,
but there was never satisfaction of the heart.
Hiranyakashipu was devotee of Brahma, but never satisfaction of the heart.
But anybody with desire or without desire who approaches Krishna, he does not feel like
fulfilling any desire.
This means he is connected to God.
This is the proof.
In Vedas also, you will not find any such proof.
Just like people tell my dad is strongest, people are attached to various gods.
Somebody will tell Ganesha is supreme.
Somebody will tell Shiva is supreme.
Somebody will tell Brahma is supreme.
But Lord Shiva does not tell like that.
Lord Shiva tells Saradhananam sarvesham, Vishnoraradhanam param.
She was asking Parvati, mother, to Shiva.
So many people to worship, whose worship is best, Lord Shiva told Vishnoraradhanam param
of all the aradhana, Vishnoraradhana is supreme.
And all the Vedas are telling this thing.
Vedavyas, who has given us the Vedas, he is explaining Krishna stu bhagavan swayam, Krishna
is supreme personality.
But if we read some specific scriptures, like Shiv Purana, Lord Shiva would be definitely
glorified because it is about Lord Shiva.
So we may think, oh, he is supreme.
Just like if you pick up a Rajasthan government's Gazette, it would describe the CM as everything.
For all the final instructions, CM is authority, but he is not authority of country, because
that is a local Gazette of that state.
In a similar fashion, such confusions can arise.
But by all these things, we can clear up.
Krishna declares, matah paratram nanyat kinchidasti dhanan jaya, nobody superior to me.
But Lord Shiva never declares like that, nobody superior to me.
Krishna tells, sarva dharman parityajya mam ekam sharanam vraja, surrender completely
unto me.
I will free you from all the sinful activities.
Lord Shiva has never declared like that, that you surrender unto me.
I will free you of all the sinful activities.
So we have great respect for Lord Shiva, his expansion of Krishna.
And he also has got his Vedic school in which he tells everyone how to chant the names of
Krishna because that only can make your life perfect.
So if you listen to Lord Shiva, if you listen to Lord Krishna, if you listen to Vedas, listen
to Vedavyaas, we will come to only one conclusion that is Krishna stu bhagavan swayam time up
it is.
So many, many questions are there.
So Prabhupada tells, do not think that my questions are being left unanswered.
Actually I'm not answering the questions.
All the questions are directly being answered by Krishna through the agency of Spiritual
Master.
I am just a servant instrument in the hands of Spiritual Master.
So when we follow, Prabhupada told, I asked only one question to my Spiritual Master.
How can I serve you?
When we engage in the service of Krishna, time and space is no limitation for Krishna.
Spiritual knowledge would be revealed directly in the heart.
So if we simply chant and hear Hare Krishna Mahamantra nicely, Prabhupada tells, follow
sadhana and four principles.
All the philosophical questions will be answered by Krishna who is seated within the heart.
So don't worry if I'm not able to answer all the questions.
Follow the spiritual life nicely, very, very strictly and all questions will be answered
from the heart.
So thank you so much.
Let us pray to Sri Sri Sita Ram Lakshman Hanuman to give us some blessing.
May we also reach the stage, the ecstasy of Lord Hanuman.
He has tore apart his chest, apparently immense pain, but he's absorbed in the ecstasy of
meditation upon Lord Ramchandra.
So with this, let us finish today's class.
Sri Sri Sita Ram Lakshman Hanuman ki, Sri Sri Krishna Balaram ki, Sri Sri Nithayi Gauram
ki.
