I would like to dedicate today's session to His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
Swami Prabhupada is our spiritual master and the founder acharya of the worldwide Hare Krishna movement,
which is also known as ISKCON, International Society for Krishna Consciousness.
So yesterday we discussed the first two shlokas of the 9th chapter of Bhagavad Gita.
And today we'll continue with verse number 3, 4 and 5.
So before we start the session, it is very very important, those who are new participants,
can you please raise hands, all those who are new today, joining for the first time these Bhagavad Gita sessions.
Okay, Deepika, Sagar, Rahul Kumar, Suresh, Anurag, Amit, Vikram, Dheeraj.
Oh, so many people for the first time. So very nice to see.
So all those who are for the first time, it is very important to elevate our consciousness to the spiritual platform
so that we can digest this spiritual stuff.
And that can be done very very easily by following the instructions of Lord Krishna Himself,
which He mentions throughout the Bhagavad Gita. It is mentioned throughout the Vedas.
Anavritti Shabdat. The understanding of God or Krishna can happen on the liberated platform.
When a person is completely freed from the laws of nature,
or to the degree a person is trying to become free from the laws of nature,
the knowledge of God, the science of God is revealed to that person.
Actually, whatever knowledge we have now, this knowledge is conditioned knowledge.
It is not real knowledge. Just like Srila Prabhupada gives example.
A pig may find very wonderful taste in stool, but for us it is not very tasty.
And we may find very good taste in halwa that may not be very tasty for a pig.
Similarly, a diseased man will tell that all this food that we are having, it is bitter in taste.
So our perception of things, our knowledge, it changes as per the nature of our mind and body.
So we can never tell what is the actual nature of reality.
So if we have to understand reality, we have to become free from all those forces
which are influencing our mind and body, thus altering our perceptions.
And how to achieve that platform of liberation? So it is told.
Anavritti Shabdat. That platform can be attained by Shabdat.
Shabdat means Transcendental Sound Vibration.
So the names of Krishna, as we have understood in the last two sessions, they are completely pure on a liberated platform.
So when we chant the names of Krishna, if you chant attentively, you will realize slowly and slowly
the nature is acting Prakritimcha Hatha Vajasam less powerfully upon us.
The animals are completely under the control of the modes of nature.
They appear to be making choice, but they are helpless.
So that is why the living entity is taken as a passive worker.
He is not considered an active worker.
We think, oh, I have freedom. I can do whatever I want in life.
No, sir, it is not fact. You will be forced to do the things in life.
The more away you are from God, God consciousness, the more you will be under the control of laws of nature.
Just like the pig, pig is forced to get attracted towards tool. It cannot help.
So pig may think, oh, I am chasing stool as by my feeble.
Similarly, as soon as a person gets man body, it will be attracted to woman body.
Woman body will be attracted to man body.
So in this way, there are a few things which are likable to us, few things we find detestful.
So all these conditionings are present in our body.
So that is why Chaitanya Charita Amrita. So that's all these scriptures that we have.
It is great science. So thus it is mentioned in the scriptures.
What is good? What is bad? It is only mental concoction.
The good and bad depends upon this body.
Actually, in this material world where people are forgetful of God, everything is bad because this life is only full of suffering.
So if we have to have real perception of life, we have to cross all these things.
Now living entities not doing anything but a helpless passive worker.
The nature forces him to chase certain things and he helplessly gets carried away.
But the more you chant the Hare Krishna Maha Mantra, the more you will realize that you are getting freedom from the laws of nature.
So if we have to understand the science of God, Bhagavad Gita, we had to be situated on that platform.
So that is why we begin our sessions with Kirtan.
But Kirtan is not possible here, so we can do Japa also.
So all those who have got your chanting beads, you can take your chanting beads with you.
So this is the gun of a devotee by which he shoots all the forces of conditioning.
So the more he shoots nicely chance, he'll become more and more free.
Inside this bag, there is this Japa bead mala on which we chant the Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
So it is very simple process.
All those who have raised hands Sagar, Deepika, Suresh, Rahul.
So it is very simple process.
All the names of God are pure and transcendental.
But a unique combination of 16 words, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare,
Hare Ram, Hare Ram, Ram Ram, Hare Hare.
It is especially very powerful to award liberation to us.
So we will all chant together at same place, same pace.
You have to vibrate your tongue and you have to hear your own voice.
Your own voice should reach your ears.
If you chant in mind, effect would be less pronounced.
So please try to chant along with me.
Spines can be erect, head, spines in straight line.
Eyes can be closed fully or half as you desire.
But do not look here and there.
Do not get distracted unless I give instruction.
Do not stop.
Please keep on chanting along with me.
We'll chant at same pace.
Focus on each and every word.
Every word is incarnation of Krishna.
Krishna is personally present in the form of word.
With this mood, with faith, reverence and great love we have to chant.
Don't think anything, simply focus on the sound.
Nothing exists for next few minutes, only I exist and the sound exists.
One special mantra, please chant in the beginning, after me.
We'll chant together.
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare
Jai Shri Krishna chaitanya
Prabhu Nityaananda
Shri Advaita Gadadhara
Shrivasadi Gaur Bhakta Vrindha
So today we will see verse number 3. I am going to share the screen. So I hope all of you are able to see this.
So we saw in the last class Lord Krishna is telling,
Rajvidya Raj Guhyam Pavitram Idam Uttamam
Praktyak Shavagamam Dharmayam Susukham Kartam Avyayam
So this Rajvidya is the king of all knowledge, the conclusion of all knowledge, knowledge of various categories.
In order to give this knowledge to us, sometimes Krishna descends personally and sometimes he sends his empowered representatives.
He sends his pure devotees here. So one such pure devotee who came here was Prahlad Maharaj.
Prahlad Maharaj was a very small boy and we celebrate the holy festival to commemorate his victory over all the wicked plans that his father made to kill this small boy, Prahlad.
So his father Hiranyakashyapu was a very very powerful demon.
So Hiranyakashyapu, Hiranyakashyapu, he sent his child to school, Prahlad.
Prahlad, please go and study economics, politics, diplomacy because he was so powerful.
He was able to throw everyone, all the demigods out of their palaces in the heavenly planets.
So Prahlad Maharaj, he went.
But when Prahlad Maharaj, before he took his birth, while he was in the womb of Kayadu, his mother, Kayadu was praying in the ashram of Narad Muni.
And Narad Muni, meanwhile, instructed her in the science of Krishna Consciousness, Bhagavatam.
And Prahlad Maharaj, he heard that science in the womb itself.
So when he took birth, he took his birth as a pure devotee, having complete knowledge.
So when he went to school and he came back from school, his father asked, my dear child, what have you learned?
What is the best teaching that you have heard in your school?
So Prahlad Maharaj tells, generally, you know, when children go to school, the parents ask, my dear child, what have you learned?
Please tell me.
And the child tells, twinkle, twinkle, little star.
Or if he's even small, he will tell A for apple, B for ball, like that.
But Prahlad Maharaj, he was telling something unique.
Prahlad Maharaj is telling,
So he's telling,
I have learnt, my dear father,
That the house in which you are living, the household life, which is centered around sense enjoyment, it is like a dark well.
So you have fallen, my dear father, into a dark well, the life which you have made your house to enjoy the senses.
There is no rescue from that place.
It is full of miseries.
When a person falls into a dark well, he breaks all his limbs and then he dies slowly.
There is no hope of coming out.
Similarly, the life of a materialist whose aim is only to enjoy the senses.
I want to study very nicely.
I want to do a job.
I want to do business, make a career or whatever so that I can enjoy my senses very nicely.
So this situation is very, very horrible.
Such an endeavor to enjoy life always ends in great misery.
So Prahlad Maharaj told,
So my dear father, you have fallen into such a dark well.
Now, what is the solution?
How can we come out of it?
My dear father, you immediately leave your house and you go to one.
And take shelter of Hari, take shelter of Krishna.
So Hiran Kashyapu became very angry.
Oh, what are you telling?
Small boy, you are telling me that I should surrender to my enemy, Hari?
And he became very, very furious.
He was not happy.
So like this Prahlad Maharaj would always quote these verses.
And Hiran Kashyapu was not happy.
He sent him back.
That who is coming?
I think the demigods are coming to teach him something.
Some wrong instruction they are imparting.
The demigods are expert in changing their forms.
So he told Shand and Amark.
Shand and Amark were the teachers of Prahlad Maharaj, the sons of Shukracharya, who is a teacher of demons.
So he scolded.
So he told, no, no, we are very vigilant.
We don't see anybody coming.
Will it be more vigilant?
Nobody should enter and spoil my son like this.
Take him back.
Took him back.
And then Prahlad Maharaj again, he came back and then he became very happy.
He started smelling his head, took him on his lap again.
He asked my dear son, please teach me.
Tell me what have you learned in the school?
So Prahlad Maharaj tells.
Adhitam means knowledge.
I think, my dear father, Adhitam Uttamam, the best part of knowledge,
the culmination of all education is
to engage in the service of Vishnu in any of the nine ways.
Either you can hear about Lord Vishnu, Shravanam or Kirtanam.
You can chant the names of Lord Vishnu, Lord Krishna, or you can think about him.
You can be his obedient servant.
You can worship him.
You can offer prayers to him or you can offer all your wealth and resources unto him.
This is the highest part of education that a person can attain.
So when a new person, he comes across such instructions directly, he may wonder,
This is highest education, Shravanam, Kirtanam, Vishnu.
Simply chanting and hearing the names of God, thinking about God,
worshipping God, offering prayers to God.
How this is highest education?
So this is very nicely explained in the Shrimad Bhagavatam.
So everyone is doing Jigyasa in order to solve the problems of life.
The scientists are doing Jigyasa.
Oh, why this is happening? Why this is happening?
Why trouble is happening in the world?
So now we are facing an epidemic or rather they are calling it pandemic.
It is there all across the world.
Similar epidemic or pandemic was there in the 14th century in Europe.
And it was known as plague.
We all know the plague.
It was incurable at that time.
Now, at least there is incubation period of 15 days here.
There overnight people would develop boils over their body
and then the person would die in a day or two.
Very, very critical situation.
And almost now the mortality is very less by this virus.
But because of this plague, it is at 40 to 50 percent of the European population succumbed to death.
So when it was happening, the people, they wanted to understand why is it happening.
So immediately they got together all the think tanks of that time.
And then they tried to understand why this is happening.
And then they figured out, yes, we have understood this is happening because of cats.
The cats are getting something, some virus, some bacteria, which is coming to us and we are dying.
So they killed all the cats of Europe wherever they could find.
And finally, they realized it is not because of cats, but because of rats.
And there were no more cats to kill the rats.
So actually, instead of solving the problem, they aggravated the situation many folds.
And thus it was mass slaughter of the European population back in the 14th century.
So the understanding from this incident is if you are doing research, you should do research till the ultimate cause.
You simply should not think, oh, because of these chemicals, such situation, mutation, disturbance is happening in the body.
No. Why that chemical has come into the body?
What is the source?
Unless you go to the root cause, you cannot solve the problems of life.
So we hear this word quite often.
Science versus faith or where the science marries faith.
People think science is one thing and faith is another thing.
Religion, they call faith.
And science means something very logical, very good, very wonderful.
So actually, this religion, what we follow, the religious instructions, especially the conclusion of all the religious instructions, the Vedanta, Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavatam, which is explanation of Vedanta, it is not blind faith.
Faith is required to understand the science as required to understand normal sciences also.
But this is actually a science.
Science means understanding the cause, understanding the nature of reality as it is.
Similarly, when Arjuna was in stress, Krishna explained to him the science.
What is the cause of your stress?
In what way a person acts that he creates stress for his life in future.
So Krishna tells to Arjuna, so you please read Vedanta Sutra and by the help of Vedanta Sutra, you do root cause analysis.
You study the cause and effect.
This misery is because of that.
That misery is because of that.
Ultimately, what is the cause of all my misery?
What is the cause of entire creation?
You do the cause and effect analysis.
So in this way, scientifically understand the purpose of this creation, scientifically understand the cause of your misery.
So that's Bhagavatam tells,
So all the Tatva Jigyas who are willing to find truth in life, they should inquire up to this point, up to what point?
What is the cause of source of everything?
Unless your research work reaches this ultimate point, just like the research work of the European scientists,
it could not reach the ultimate point, but it finished in cats, which was also the cause because the cats, they were coming in contact with the rats.
And through cat, it might have got spread, but they were not the ultimate cause.
And if you don't reach the ultimate cause, it can actually aggravate the problem rather than solving it.
Another example I would like to quote, just like a criminal who is being put into jail and he's getting punished.
So if a criminal thinks, oh, this policeman, he arrests me every time.
I try to steal something from the neighboring house or society every time.
This person only catches me.
So if I kill this person, then nobody will catch me and I'll be happy.
So yes, that policeman is definitely the cause of his arrest, but not the ultimate cause.
So if that criminal, he tries to kill or push away the policeman, then what will happen?
Will he become happy?
Now, nobody would arrest him.
No, that is even a greater crime that he has committed in a similar fashion.
Science, because it is not able to reach modern science.
The ultimate cause, the result of modern science is we have created instruments of our own ruination of our own destruction.
And in 100 years, they tell world is going to be destroyed because of this industrial revolution, the science we have brought about.
So when you don't reach to the ultimate cause, it is extremely, extremely dangerous.
Like we understood from the incident of plague.
We understood from this allegorical example, from this analysis of of the psychology of a criminal who is less intelligent.
Or if a person is smart, he can understand.
No, no policeman is not the cause.
The policeman arrests me.
And then the advocate, he argues against me and the judge, he writes the sentence against me.
Let me kill the judge or the advocates till he does not know.
He does not know ultimately why he's suffering.
He's suffering because he's breaking the laws of nature.
Who has made the laws of nature?
The king.
So if I follow the king, if I satisfy the king, unless I understand who is the king, what is his intention, what are his instructions?
There is no question of me remaining happy in this place in a similar fashion.
Unless somebody does research, research, research and research and arrives at the conclusion of origin of the entire world, there is no question of happiness in life.
He will get stuck at the intermediate links or causes, try to fix that cause, and thus he will create more and more misery in his life.
That is what is happening in the world.
And what is that ultimate cause?
So that is explained in the seventh chapter, knowledge of the absolute and how to attain that supreme personality, whose cause of everything that is mentioned in each chapter, which is called attaining the absolute.
So like this, if you keep on doing research, Earth has come from the sun, they tell.
And from Earth, the moon came out.
Various theories are there.
If you trace back, back, back from where everything is coming.
So the Vedas that is mentioned, all those people who have dedicated their life to find the cause of everything, they tell in the ultimate issue, you will reach a person and that person's name is Krishna.
This entire creation, all the material energies, spiritual energies are coming from Krishna.
So Krishna tells,
Those people who are not able to put faith in this thing,
who are not able to faithfully understand this process of attaining the absolute truth, which Krishna will mention in this chapter.
And he has explained previously that attaining me is the aim of life.
If they don't have this faith, then what happens?
They are not able to attain me.
And
They come back.
Those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot attain me, O conqueror of force, but return to birth and death in this material world.
So next Krishna explains.
So Krishna tells,
By me in my unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in me, but I am not in them.
Bhutani means living entities. They are situated in me.
All beings are situated in me, but I am not situated in them.
So Krishna is telling, I expand myself as energies, just like the tree is there.
Tree expands itself as the branches, as leaves, twigs and fruits.
In a similar fashion, the Supreme Personality of God, just like the sun is there, sun expands itself as its light rays all across the universe.
And the entire life in the universe is sustained because of sunlight.
If there is no sunlight, there is no question of life. Everything would be dead and gone.
In a similar fashion, Krishna tells,
So some people tell, God is there everywhere. What is the need to go to temple?
Yes, God is there everywhere, but how He is everywhere, that Krishna explains here in 4th verse of 9th chapter.
God is present everywhere, but in avyakta murthina, in unmanifest form.
And in temple, He is personally present in a form which appears to be like that of a stone, in a form which appears to be like that of wood or glass or some metal.
But actually that is God Himself, just like we discussed in the day before in the class.
That the advanced yogis and the demigods, residents of higher planets,
and even advanced yogis on this planet, they can change any form that they like.
Person can become stone, person can become tree, he can transform himself.
In a similar fashion, God, He comes and transforms Himself into a form which appears like that of wood or stone, marble or some metal.
But that is actually God standing over there.
But because we cannot see spirit from these eyes, which are only designed to see matter,
when the devotee is very, very eager to engage in service of God, God takes such a form as stands in the temples.
So if you have to meet personally God and render service unto Him, establish your lost connection with Him.
Visiting temples is very important.
So Krishna explains, I am there everywhere. All the living entities are situated in me, but I am not situated in them. I am aloof.
And then He tells, Nacchamastani bhutani paschimayogam aishwaram.
So this is contradiction. Krishna tells, all beings are situated in me.
And here He is telling, Nacchamastani bhutani, all living entities and yet everything that is created does not rest in me.
Behold my mystic opulence. What is this?
Krishna tells, all the living entities are resting on me, means in my energy.
And then Krishna tells, everything that is created does not rest in me. What does it mean?
That is why Krishna tells, behold my mystic opulence Arjuna. Just see how I can support both contradictions.
Everything is situated in me and everything is not situated in me.
So the understanding is as Krishna has explained in the seventh chapter and Krishna will explain again further.
So there are two parts of the existence, two part of the creation.
One is the material world, another is spiritual world.
The laws of material world and spiritual world are entirely different.
Here in this material world, everything, even the spirit, we are spirit souls, but we are also covered with matter.
Here spirit is mixed with matter and in the spiritual world, it is only made up of spirit completely purely.
Just like if you lift a lump of mud here, in that lump of mud also, there is some water, but it is not pure water.
However, if you go to ocean, it is completely water.
In a similar fashion here in this lump of matter, spirit soul is mixed.
That is material world. But Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita.
When you cross the boundaries of this universe, if you are able to do it using any of your scientific means, if you can,
then there is another world which is not made up of mixture of matter and spirit, but it is made up of pure spirit.
And it is at that place where I live.
Just like we live here in this here in this material world, Krishna also lives there in some place.
And that place is completely made up of spirit, spiritual world.
And Krishna tells, any person who reaches that place, he does not come back.
So this understanding people do not have.
But everyone in the Indian civilization, it should not be called Indian, rather the Vedic civilization follower of the Vedas.
They were very much aware of this fact that what is the aim of life?
The aim of life is not to keep on taking these material bodies, which are but the sources of misery, but to stop this process of birth and death.
Something is causing us to get old.
Something is causing diseases within us, some changes in the body.
It is a science. So Krishna is telling if you follow some methods, which I recommend you, this disease will get cured.
You will be freed from old age. You will be free from all these things.
So just like a person is born in Hiroshima, Nagasaki, naturally he would be crippled because of the nature of that place.
Some radiation is present in that place.
Similarly, any person who takes birth in this material world, death, old age, diseases, changing bodies, it is fixed and which is very, very miserable situation for the living entity.
So the aim of life is to stop this process of birth and death.
And for this, the living entity has to transfer itself from material world to spiritual world.
And how does it transfer itself?
It is very simple. Krishna is explained in 8th chapter, attaining the absolute.
Whatever a person thinks at the time of death, the same state he attains in the next life.
Therefore, at the time of death, if a person is absorbed in the thoughts of Krishna, then he attains immediately a body.
The nature of that body is like Krishna, Krishna's body.
What is the nature of Krishna's body?
Krishna's body is not like this temporary body, miserable body.
Srila Prabhupada explains, the Vedas explain, when Krishna was present on the battlefield of Kurukshetra, he was 125 years old.
But although he was 125 years old, he was very, very young in his appearance, as if a boy of 15 to 20 years age.
So Krishna never aged beyond that, he was always very young, 15 to 20 years.
So Krishna is beyond old age, Krishna is beyond all diseases, Krishna is beyond all these problems, Krishna's body.
So when a person is thinking of Krishna at the time of death, the same state he will attain without fail.
So this is the secret that Krishna mentions.
Whatever a person thinks at the time of death, the same body of similar nature he would attain.
Just like Bharat Maharaj, he was very advanced spiritualist.
But at the time of his death, he got attached to a deer. Thus he had to become deer in the next life.
He will not get a human form.
So thus it is told that if a person is very much attached to, if man is very fond of woman and woman is very fond of man,
husband and wife are very much attached to each other, they interchange their roles.
The wife becomes husband and the husband becomes wife.
Because the wife is thinking of husband, a male form, she will get a male body in the next life.
And the husband is thinking of woman, a female form, he will get a female body in the next life.
These are the laws of nature.
Of course, it may be difficult for some to understand. Nevertheless, it is science.
When you study all these things, when you spend some time, all these things would become very, very clear.
So some people tell we are not able to put faith in this.
And they tell religion means faith and science means something logical in this thing.
So Krishna explains very nicely in the Bhagavad Gita 18 chapter.
Actually, everyone is having some or the other kind of faith.
Every person is having some faith.
A person who is a theist, he is having faith in God, that God exists, he is living at some place.
Just like a child has no knowledge of the president or king who is running the entire country, but the king lives somewhere.
The president lives somewhere, although I have not seen White House or presidential house.
In a similar fashion, theist has strong faith that yes, God lives there.
The description is there.
An atheist has strong faith that God does not exist.
Prabhupada tells how you can tell like that.
Have you visited all the planets of the universe?
Even to the next nearest planet, we have not gone.
Even though he has not seen all the planets of the universe, what to speak of searching beyond the universe.
He is concluding God or creator does not exist because I cannot create universe to nobody can create universe.
So this is like frog in the well philosophy.
Prabhupada explains Vedas explain technically.
So when frog was there, he came from a very big ocean and he landed up inside a well.
So there were many, many frogs in the well.
And one frog was very intelligent.
His name is his name was Dr. Frog.
He had done PhD.
It seems very intelligent.
So Dr. Frog was told you please meet this new guest.
He has come to our wealth.
So Dr. Frog, being the smart, smartest fellow, he approached this frog.
We have come from the ocean and he asked, sir, from where you are coming from, which will are you coming?
He told, no, no, not from well.
I'm coming from motion.
So it'll ocean.
What is that ocean?
Is it a very deep well?
No, no, it's a very big body of water.
It is very deep.
Well, how deep?
His well was around two feet deep or four feet deep.
No, no, we're still deeper.
Very big.
Well, how big?
Ten feet?
No, no, still very big.
Well, how much?
Fifty feet?
No, no, it is very, very big.
He told you are crazy frog because that frog in the well, he has not seen anything beyond as well.
He cannot imagine what is an ocean like in a similar fashion because I cannot create any planet or universe.
I think nobody can create.
Why?
It is not a good thing to think like that.
So atheist is also very, very faithful.
Similarly, science.
So Charles Townes, who got Nobel for inventing laser, he made a very wonderful statement that actually people accused the people who are
religionists of having blind faith, but actually the scientists themselves are having blind faith.
The scientists are having blind faith that using my brain, I can understand everything, whatever exists in this universe, whatever is the fact of this universe.
Just like an ant living in the corner of this room.
How an ant can understand what is democracy?
What is happening in the world?
What is happening in China?
What is trade war?
What is ISIS?
What is bureaucracy?
What is legislature?
What is all these things?
They cannot understand.
Ant is having a brain.
It can arrange its eating, mating, sleeping, defending.
That's all.
An ant's brain is not designed to understand algebra, calculus and all these things in a similar fashion.
The scientists are having the blind faith using their brain, their intelligence.
They can figure out everything of this world.
Isn't it a blind faith?
Yes, there is a blind faith.
You are thinking you're this instrument.
It will expose you to complete reality.
You can understand everything.
So that is also blind faith.
Similarly, a materialist.
He tells, oh, just like all of you who are there, you come to classes.
So your friends would be asking, it is all illusion.
Many people, they do not put faith.
However, they are also putting faith.
They're having very strong faith in the money that if I get this money, I'll become happy.
They're having very strong faith on the subject matter of their infatuation.
Oh, this boy is very good.
This girl is very good.
If I get this boy, I'll be very happy.
If I get this girl, I'll be very happy.
And immediately after marriage, the situation is different.
They realize it is not fact, but they were having very strong faith.
So every person is having some or the other faith.
And the faith depends upon, as we discussed in the beginning of today's class, the conditioning of mind and body.
The pig is convinced that the stool is very, very tasty.
And humans are convinced that the halwa is very, very tasty.
A person who is sick, he's convinced this food is bitter.
So that's our convictions, our understanding of reality.
It totally depends upon our mind and body system.
It is in Satvaguna, Rajaguna or Tamaguna.
So the people who are in Satvaguna, they can put faith on the devatas.
They worship the devatas, Lord Shiva, Lord Brahma or Lord Indra, Chandra, Varuna, etc.
And sometimes they worship Lord Krishna, Vishnu also in improper understanding, impersonal way.
Those who are in Rajaguna, they worship the materialists.
Now, worshipping does not mean always showing the incense and flowers.
Just like Srila Prabhupada explains, when you are reading Bhagavad Gita, you are worshipping Krishna by your intelligence.
So glorifying them, holding them in awe and surrendering to their instructions, that is also called worshipping.
And they actually do kind of worship also.
You'll find, especially in Mumbai, they put big, big statues of political leaders, some famous political leaders.
And throughout the country, you'll find that is the case.
Sometimes they'll put statue of a king, sometimes of a political leader.
So those people who are in mode of passion, they worship materialists.
Another name for materialist is demon.
So and those people who are on Tamasic platform, Tamaguna, they worship ghosts and evil spirits,
especially if you go to the villages in Rajasthan and Bengal in many places,
you'll find you'll find various people worshipping ghosts and evil spirits.
Mainly these people, Tamasic people, they're very envious.
They only are interested in destruction.
They want to destroy their neighbor, their family member, they are envious of them.
So they take help of ghosts and evil spirit, perform some magic for them, do harm to other people.
So a person is always having some faith.
It is not that any person is living without faith.
But those who are Tamasic, they have faith in ghosts.
Those who are Rajasic, they put their faith and they worship the materialists.
And those who are Satvik, they worship demigods.
And those who are the Satvik, by following Sadhana Bhakti, they have become completely purified.
They are able to put faith in God, Supreme Personality Krishna, and they are able to worship him very nicely.
So thus it is not that only devotees, they have faith.
Everyone has faith, some or the other faith.
And which person is having the right faith?
The person who is free from the influences of nature.
And that you can see from the lives of the great devotees.
Prabhupada is completely free from the influences of nature.
Prabhupada would hardly sleep for a couple of hours at night.
And although he was very very old, he was always working, translating, giving lectures morning to evening.
Prabhupada would always keep on travelling.
One country, second country, third country, after three days another country.
And there is no jet lag for Prabhupada.
People one or two or three days, they suffer from jet lag.
So it is night time, it is eight o'clock, it is time to sleep.
And then Prabhupada is immediately flown to another country where it is morning Mangala Arati time.
Again, Prabhupada would start the same schedule.
Attend Mangala Arati, go for morning walk, do Japa, translation, lecture and everything.
There was no jet lag for Prabhupada.
Prabhupada left eating for many many months when he decided to wind up his pastimes on this world.
And many many other amazing pastimes are there, maybe I can share in future.
Similarly, all the Goswamis, Roop Goswami, Sat Goswami are previous Acharyas.
And even in recent history we can see.
Even Prahlad Maharaj, he was put in boiling oil, oil did not harm him.
Even Meera Bhai, she was administered poison, poison did not act.
So this is called liberation.
So these people are completely unaffected by what is happening at the mind and body level.
Now you should ask such a person, please tell me what is truth of life.
Because you are free from the influences of nature, so you can tell me what is truth.
That is why I hope those people who have attended first session, you have done efforts to browse through nectar of instruction.
The first shloka tells, Vacho vegam manasakrodh vegam jiva vegam udrupasth vegam.
A person who can control all the forces of nature, who is getting freed from the pushes and pulls of these forces of nature.
He is able to understand knowledge and explain it to others.
As long as our senses are pushing and pulling us, we are under the laws of nature.
Our faith will depend upon Satpaguna, Rajaguna, Tamaguna, the energy which is influencing us.
So when a person is in lower modes, then he is not able to put faith on Krishna.
And Krishna tells, as we discussed in the previous verse, this process is very, very simple.
Susukham kartumadvayam, very, very pleasant to perform.
Chant the names of Krishna, sing and dance in front of him, eat prasadam.
But asraddha dhana purusha Krishna is telling today, those people who cannot put faith, they lag behind.
They are not able to perfect this process.
So how to put faith? We have to always keep ourselves in shuddha Satpaguna.
So that happens by associating with the devotees who are there on shuddha Satpaguna sattvic platform.
So associating with devotees and very strictly following the principles of sadhana bhakti,
which free our body from the lower energies.
So in association, when we follow sadhana bhakti, four regulative principles, 16 rounds very, very nicely throughout the day chanting,
then we are able to put faith in Krishna and the faith keeps on increasing and life becomes successful.
So as long as we are failing in four regulative principles, senses are not under control, sadhana is not proper.
So we will not be able to put faith.
So have patience till the time your senses are not under control.
Faith will shake. Keep, increase the devotee association.
Follow sadhana bhakti, fix your time.
You cannot follow 16 rounds still.
You cannot follow four o'clock in the morning, then at least get a five o'clock in the morning or six o'clock
or fix some time in the morning as per your convenience before sunrise or whatever time.
And get up at that time and fix your morning routine.
These many minutes of chanting, these many minutes of reading, do sadhana sadhana means austerity tapasya.
This time, these many minutes come what may I'll dedicate for spiritual life and take association of devotees in this way.
True faith will increase and we will understand Bhagavad Gita, God consciousness very, very nicely.
So with this, I learned this.
I'll finish today's class.
And those people who have any questions, you are welcome to put forth question.
What is the boundary of the universe?
So very nice question.
So the way that explain the others are so wonderful.
That was flat.
People understood, but we understand from the very incarnation.
So very nicely it is explained that what I have thought he took the earth on his tusks and then he took out from the garbota quotient from the water body.
So earth is spherical in a similar fashion.
The universe is called Brahmanda.
And that means egg.
The universe actually, if you are able to trace its boundaries, it is in the shape of an egg.
And the universe has got seven layers.
Earth, water, fire, mind, intelligence.
All these energies are present.
And the thickness is also mentioned.
The thickness of each energy is 10 times more than the previous layer.
In this way, the boundaries of the universe are explained.
And the aim of human life is to go beyond the boundaries of this universe and reach the spiritual world.
If you stop the cycle of birth and death, then there will be a point where there is no one on this earth.
Please explain, Prabhuji.
No.
So on this earth, in this human form of life, we can attain liberation generally.
So human beings, the number of souls which are present as human beings, more than that,
the number of bacteria present in a small food particle which is stuck in between your teeth.
So a small food particle, the number of souls it is having, that is equal to the number of human being present on this planet.
So even if all the humans get liberated, nothing is lost.
So many souls are still there.
Who will come and take human form of life?
And then it depends upon them.
They want liberation or not.
Somebody is asking if we are in ICU, then I did not understand.
If you are in ICU, then what?
If you are in ICU, then think of Krishna, pray to Krishna, you are going to die.
What is the process of attaining spirituality in this material life?
I mean before death of material body.
Please answer, Prabhuji.
The process of attaining spirituality, Krishna is mentioning in this chapter, most confidential knowledge.
Chanting and hearing the names of God, especially in Kali Yuga, this is the process.
And in parallel, understanding the instructions of Krishna.
As you have mentioned in your last two classes about the importance of devotee association,
so if I am hearing a devotee lecture or phone call,
is that equally effective as it is highlighted in scriptures in several places?
So yes, hearing is also association.
Following the instructions is also association.
Carrying out the orders is also association.
And hearing is actually the most important association.
But as far as possible, we should try to live with devotees because if you are living with materialist,
for a while we are associating with devotees and then we are associating with materialists.
So it is just like you are heating a wood and before it can catch fire,
you again put water onto the wood.
So that is why a person should hear the devotees and also live with the devotees.
So you can preach and create devotees around you or you can shift to a place where you can have neighbors who are all devotees.
So in this way, we should hear the devotees and also we should live with devotees.
We should never live at a place which is not filled with devotees.
Are things which are happening to us or going to happen in future is decided by supreme God?
The things which are going to happen to us, it is not decided directly by the supreme God.
Just like the government has made some laws, government has set in place an examination,
let's say UPSC examination.
Anybody is allowed to crack it, study it.
You are free. You use your freedom. You study it.
You crack the exam and government will give you the comforts and luxuries.
Similarly, there are some laws.
If you break, government will put you into jail and we'll be met with all punishments.
So thus, God does not directly decide our destiny.
But God has put in place the laws of nature, laws of karma.
Now, as you act, you create your own destiny.
One of my friends told in Bible, it is mentioned that Jesus Christ made eat first, then son, then human beings.
But in our scripture, Shreemad Bhagavatam and Bhagavad Gita, it is mentioned regarding the sequence of creation of universe.
Please guide us with reference.
Please ask me personally this question. I'm not able to understand the language.
What is the process of attaining spirituality we discussed?
What is the difference between worshipping and offering prayers?
Worshipping, we understand Pancharathri Ka Vidi, deity worship.
We offer flowers. We offer incense.
We offer a deep lamp.
We offer Argya, water.
We offer Vastra, Chamar, Vyanjan, peacock fan, all these things.
This is called worship, which happens in the temple, in the altar.
And offering prayers, just like various prayers are there in Bhagavatam, Brahmasahita, standing in front of Krishna and offering prayers,
just like Sansaradaavanal, we sing in the morning,
Sansaradaavanal, Lidloka, Atrana, Karunne, Ishvara, Paramakrishna, Satchidanand, Vigraha.
So these prayers which are mentioned in the Bhagavatam, Bhagavad Gita, singing these prayers is called Vandanam.
And worshipping Krishna means offering those paraphernalia, deity worship.
Both are different processes and sometimes they can be combined also.
Person who is worshipping, he can offer prayers also and at the same time he can worship.
Is chanting for our loved ones effective?
Yes, chanting is effective for everyone.
So when we chant the Hare Krishna Maha Mantra, all those people who are connected to us, they also get the benefit.
The closer a person is to us, the more he will get the benefit.
What is the process of attaining?
Okay, this we discussed.
Voice is very low, Prabhu. Others also please give feedback if my voice is very low.
I think others are able to hear properly.
Are our senses working when we are in ICU emergency?
So in ICU, various cases are there.
Sometimes some people are unconscious over there.
So your gross body is not acting, but subtle body in mind, you may be thinking of something.
And sometimes a person is conscious also, so it depends upon his state.
Sometimes the senses may work, gross senses, otherwise the subtle senses, mind is always working.
And sometimes in comatose condition, that is called coma.
So that Prabhupada describes is a special case.
When a person is very, very sinful, then he stays in coma for a very, very long time because his case is very complicated.
Just like some cases, judges take many, many years to decide it is very complex.
So when a person is very sinful, so some time is taken to decide his next body.
So such a sinful person stays in coma.
Why do some people have shaky faith?
What should be done to achieve true faith?
As I discussed, we have to get free from all the attachments, all the forces which are influencing us.
The force of talking, the force of tasting, the force of belly eating more, the force of the genitals, the force of anger.
All these various six Vegas are there.
You can read Nectar of Instruction for that.
The website is PrabhupadaBooks.com.
I suggested Veda based website in that the books which are there of Srila Prabhupada, some edition.
It has been edited so that it is better if you read PrabhupadaBooks.com, that website.
Original books of Prabhupada will be available on that website.
So you can visit PrabhupadaBooks.com, read Nectar of Instruction first verse and you will get the understanding.
So only a person who is liberated from these forces of nature, he can attain true faith.
So live in association of devotees or associate as much as possible and follow sadhana bhakti very, very nicely.
Don't break four regulatory principles, meat eating, intoxication, gambling and illicit sex.
So if you break these principles, immediately a person loses faith, sattvic faith.
So by this, our faith will increase.
As Krishna said, that one who remembers me at the time of death attains liberation.
Is it like I do sinful activities throughout the life and chant his name at the end of life?
It is not so easy.
If a person is doing sinful activities at the time of death, at the time of death, mind, body so disturbed,
even a person who has practiced nicely, it is difficult for him to chant at the time.
That is why always 24 hours we should practice.
I should always keep on chanting.
Never forget Krishna.
So what to speak of a person who is sinful?
He will simply think of sinful activities at the time of death.
At the time of death, entire life it passes in front of us.
And those activities which we have done predominantly, they'll capture our mind.
So a sinful person will only think of bad attachments and the sins which he has done.
Not possible to think of God.
But somehow or the other, if a person is able to think of God with proper understanding, he will be liberated.
Hare Krishna.
Great learning Prabhuji.
Thank you very much.
Please keep learning.
What is the difference between Shuddh Sattvic and simply Sattvic?
Sattvaguna in this material world is not pure.
It is mixed.
It is mixed with Rajaguna and Tamuguna.
So Shuddh Sattva means there is no Rajaguna, no Tamuguna at all.
And that Shuddh Sattvaguna is found in the spiritual world.
So if we have to understand God, God is revealed on Shuddh Sattva platform.
So on Sattvic platform, a person can understand the material world as it is.
A Tamasic person who is just like a person who is drunk or who is sleeping.
He is under heavy influence of Tamuguna.
A person who is sleeping, he cannot even understand who is standing there next to me.
Somebody is coming to kill me.
That is called ignorance.
And a person who is Rajasic, he is having so many desires in his life.
He also cannot think properly what I'm supposed to do in life.
What is happiness?
What is life all about?
And the person who is in Sattvaguna, life is regulated, senses are under control.
He can understand the material manifestation as it is.
He can understand I am not the body.
But the true nature of spirit soul, true nature of God, he cannot understand.
For this, he needs to come to Shuddh Sattvic platform that only a devotee can attain.
So Brahmanas are on Sattvic platform and Vaishnavas, devotees, they are on Shuddh Sattvic platform.
What we think at the time of death, we become that.
So by this logic, what is the point of worshipping?
Because at then we can think of free Krishna and we are successful.
Please explain. Oh, yes, very nice.
So let us enjoy the entire life, smoke, drink.
And at the time of death, see Lord Krishna's photo in front of you.
So as I told, it is not possible.
Even if you are keeping photo of Krishna in front of you,
you will not be able to think of Krishna at the time of death.
Whatever activities we perform, just like throughout the day,
whatever activity you have done predominantly, the same activity will come in dream.
So whatever activity we have done throughout the life at the time of death,
we will think of similar things.
So that is why throughout the life we have to practice and that can happen anytime without notice.
Why do we suffer due to acts of others not in our control?
Is it our karma, even though we have not done anything wrong?
So the question asked is why we suffer because of others.
So there are two understandings.
One thing is if, let's say, as we discussed before also,
some of my family member is troubling me or my neighbor is troubling me or my boss is troubling me.
And I think he's the cause of my trouble because of his bad behavior.
I'm suffering. No, it is my karma because of my karma.
I have got a person who is banded bad around me who behaves badly because I behaved badly in previous life to somebody.
So now I've got a person who will behave badly with me.
So it is my karma which is coming through a person.
So that is why a devotee does not take offenses with any bad behavior.
He is very, very tolerant.
He is very, very merciful.
He understands just like delivery boy.
If a delivery boy has brought a swiggy boy has brought bad food.
So because the restaurant while you're cursing the boy in a similar fashion,
devotee does not take offense with his relatives,
with his neighbors, with society or with anybody.
So a devotee is always so a devotee.
He is always understanding it is because of my karma.
But karma sharing also happens.
If a family member is performing some sinful activity,
the other family members also they will suffer from this reaction.
And if a family member does good activity,
they also share because our decisions are influenced by the family.
That is why it is told in the scriptures.
You don't have right to become father, mother or relative or spiritual master
if you cannot save your dependents or relatives from the clutches of death.
So if you can save your children from the clutches of death,
then only produce children.
Just like a college has no right to give admission to students
if it cannot get them placed in a similar fashion.
If we can deliver a living entity from the clutches of death,
then only we should establish a relationship with the living entity.
It is our duty.
All those who are in touch with us, we try to preach them God consciousness.
So that's when a person does bad activity,
the relatives also they share the bad karma.
So this is a proper understanding.
Those who are living at home or outside,
how they can manage or plan their schedule for spiritual things.
Those who are living outside.
So spiritual life is very easy, especially we have the zoom sessions now.
So you can always come and attend and online.
Also, so many lectures are there.
Try to develop a habit of hearing Sheila Prabhupada.
Sheila Prabhupada's voice is transcendental.
So as much as possible, try to hear Sheila Prabhupada.
Sheila Prabhupada Vani is the website for all his recordings.
So every day, hear some lecture or few minutes of Prabhupada
that is accessible everywhere.
Spiritual life starts with hearing.
So chanting hearing, we can do everywhere, anywhere.
And if you do it with discipline, you make spiritual advancement.
So wherever we are, fix your morning routine very, very nicely.
And evening routine morning, as soon as you get up,
dedicate the first few minutes to spiritual life, chanting, hearing, reading.
Do your entire duties.
Remember Krishna as much as possible.
And when you finish your duties again at the end, chant little,
do some kirtan or read and then go to sleep,
especially the morning part is very, very, very important.
So when you are living at home or some other place, you don't get devotees.
You can fix your sadhana as per your convenience.
Ideally, sadhana should start at four o'clock.
You should get a four o'clock in the morning and do sadhana.
If that is not possible, whatever is possible in current circumstances,
do that slowly.
We will make advancement.
But this morning sadhana, fixing morning routine,
it is very, very important for spiritual advancement.
And then very soon try to get association of devotees.
Without association of devotees, our spiritual life will be finished.
But meanwhile, keep on following this with discipline.
Pray to Krishna. Krishna will arrange things.
Rabu, you just told that at the time of death,
if someone thinks of something becomes that,
please explain me how someone can think of becoming bacteria at the time of death.
OK, so if many, many people, they think about bacteria,
and their life is dedicated to do research about bacteria,
so then he will become bacteria.
If a person is always doing swimming, then he'll become fish.
Or if he's always thinking of fishes, he'll become fish.
If he's always thinking of ghosts, he'll become ghosts.
That's many people are absorbed in analyzing bacteria, thoughts of bacteria.
Or if he acts like a bacteria, acts like an insect,
an insect or deliver dirty places, eat anything and everything.
So those people who are very, very, very sinful.
So these people are given such places, such low births.
So either thinking or your activity, if it is like that.
So you want to keep on sleeping on and on and on.
Then you'll get a bare body.
If you want to remain naked, then you'll get a tree body, stand naked for millions of years.
So like this basis, our activity also nature facilitates our desires
and gives us a suitable body.
Rabuji, could you please tell me where can I get recordings of these sessions?
I missed out some part of today's session.
It is very heavy file.
So I have the recordings in my computer.
Please feel free to come and collect audio file.
However, I can share that.
Please. You can contact us and we'll share it.
Hare Krishna Prabhu.
Why we are facing problem if someone positively do the spiritual activities properly.
I don't understand the language.
Why we are facing problem is someone positively do the spiritual activities properly.
Maybe you are asking if you are following spiritual life very, very nicely.
Still, why there are problems in life.
So have patience.
Just like a person who has started studying, taken admission in college, cannot expect job immediately.
20 years, 25 years, keep on studying, studying, studying, studying.
Then suddenly money will come.
So in this way, keep on following Sadhana Bhakti gradually.
You will understand problems are affecting less, less and less.
And one fine day you are liberated.
Can we stop good or bad effects of Karma now in this life?
Very important question.
Yes, can we stop good or bad effects of Karma now in this life?
So as I told, there is no good effect.
Every effect is bad.
So called punya, good activities that we do.
That means simply suffering in a good position.
That's it.
Instead of getting diseased old age, instead of having breakups in India in a poor in a small town,
you will have old age disease and breakups in America.
That is called punya or in some other better planet.
But the miseries are there always.
Instead of fighting with other party, let's say Congress, BJP or Communist Party or some way, some ever whatever,
you will fight with the demons in heavenly planets.
They have a lot of pleasure there, but the demons attack.
They're also there.
Also, there is politics.
They are trying to take his Indra's position.
So there's the same problem.
They exist everywhere.
So, yes, in the human form of life, we can come out of this.
These problems, how we can come out that Krishna explains in Bhagavad Gita throughout the Bhagavad Gita
and repeats again in the conclusion.
Forget all the nonsense engagements which you have decided.
All your plans of happiness that you have made.
Simply follow my instructions and completely surrender unto me.
When we completely surrender unto Krishna, that day onwards, all our karma is stopped.
