Jai Sri Krishna, Jai Tanya, Prabhu Nityananda, Sri Advaita Gadadhara,
Sri Vasadi Gaur Bhakta Vrinda, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna,
Hare Hare, Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare,
Mukham Karoti Vachadam Pangum Langaayate Giri,
Yad Kripaatamaham Vande Shri Gurum Deenatana,
Sri Chaitanya Mano Bhishta Sthapitam Yena Bhut,
Swayam Rupa Kadamayam Datadheesopadantikam,
Namo Brahmane Deva, Govramanita, Jagaditha, Krishna, Govinda, Namasteya Lagra, Namasteya Mushla, Namasteya Revati Kanta.
So let us see, we are discussing chapter no. 9, the most confidential knowledge.
Let us continue from where we left yesterday.
I will share the screen with you.
The session is dedicated to His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,
He is our Founder Acharya of the Worldwide Hare Krishna Movement and our beloved Spiritual Master.
Verse no. 20
Trayvidya māma soma pāf pūta pāpā,
Yajñai rishtva asvargatim prārthayante,
te punyama sādhyasurendra lokaṁ,
aśnanti divyāndi vidyeva bhogaṁ.
So what Krishna is explaining here,
Those who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice,
seeking the heavenly planets, worship Me indirectly.
They take birth on the planet of Indra, where they enjoy Godly delights.
So Krishna explains, as we discussed before,
who are the people who are on the topmost rung of the spiritual ladder.
They have perfected their spiritual life.
They are called the great souls, mahat or mahatma.
So what is the behavior of mahatma?
We discussed yesterday and the day before also.
Mahatmanas tu mām pārtha daivim prakritim āśritāḥ.
The mahatmas are under the shelter of the internal energy of Krishna.
We discussed internal energies just like the king maintains the citizens, the civil population,
and the king also maintains the prisoners,
who are envious of the rules and regulations of the king, envious of the king.
In a similar fashion, those living entities who are envious,
are we envious? We are all jealous? Nirbhay, are you jealous?
So in the material world, there are two words used for householders.
One is grahastha, another is grahamedhi.
Because this envy especially builds up, it is always there,
in all the people in the material world,
but especially builds up very strongly in the household life.
So those people who enter in the household life
and follow the rules and regulations very nicely,
for advancement of spiritual life, they are called grahasthas.
And those people who do not follow the rules and regulations of spiritual life,
but they have taken to family life just for sense enjoyment,
they are called grahammedhis. Grahastha and grahammedhi.
Medhi means envious. So what is the difference between these two people?
Grahastha and grahammedhi. Medhi means envious. What is envy?
When the neighbor is in stress, this person becomes very happy.
And when the neighbor is happy, this person becomes very stressed.
This is called grahammedhi. And in one word, we can call it competitiveness,
which we have in society today. What is competitiveness?
Suppose there is one chapati left in our house,
and some three brothers are there, and one chapati is there.
What shall the three brothers do? They will all run and fight for the chapati,
tear, piece or two, whatever they can. No, brother will tell,
okay, please you take. You have not taken.
It's okay. I'm not hungry. I'll manage like that. Isn't it?
But if you throw that piece of chapati among animals, what will happen?
Oh, they will fight and do this thing.
So wherever there is love, there is no question of competition.
Isn't it? Out of love, if anything is there,
you would like to offer it to the other person.
But when there is no love, there is competition in the society.
So we talk of big, big things. Please have brotherhood.
Please have sisterhood. Have all these hoods.
And then we are behaving like hooded snakes. Snake is very, very envious.
So what is competition? There is limited resources.
There is limited vacancy. Suppose I may get a chance to advance in my life,
and a person is there whom I love. He has a chance to advance in life.
So we will allow the other person, you please take it.
This envy is there in all the relationships.
But it is minimal in the case of father and son.
So when the son is advancing in life, the father feels happy.
Oh, yes, my son should be ahead of me. He becomes very, very happy.
But in all other cases, the heartburn.
So this person is going, that is happening like that.
So in a similar fashion, in a society where there is love,
there is no question of envy.
If there is an opportunity, person would like to give other the chance.
My dear brother, you please take it.
One chapati is there. You eat, I will starve. I will fast.
It does not matter.
So we see in society what is happening.
If our friend fails, we tell, it hurts.
But if friend gets more marks, it hurts even more.
So this is how the society is there.
So if my friend has got better job, if my friend has got better package,
oh, that burns my heart like anything. Isn't it?
Oh, how did this happen?
And Sharma ji's son failed. Oh, it is so nice.
His son also failed. His selection also failed.
That is so good.
So this is called grahamedhi.
So when the other person does not advance, he becomes very happy.
When the other person is advancing, he becomes his heart is burning.
This is called the life of a materialist and a person is burning.
So that is why all these people are working very hard morning to evening.
It is the envy which is driving these people into tremendous work.
I cannot see. I have enough to eat, isn't it?
So I have enough to eat. I have enough to wear. I have enough to live.
Where is the question?
But why? What is causing me to work hard day and night morning to evening?
It is the envy.
I cannot see my cousins, my brothers, my neighbors, my friends advance more than me.
So I came across an article which was mentioned by
Topper of IITJ, the most prestigious exam of our country.
And this person was doing very, very exceptionally well in his studies.
In his school time.
And thus, when he was, I think it was a case of 9th standard or 10th standard,
he dreamt of topping the IIT examination.
And the way he was preparing, there was a good scope.
He could have done that.
And then he was dreaming. He was not from a very big city.
Nobody had topped IIT before or even in good ranks.
So he thought, yes, yes, I should top.
And he was waiting that after two years, I have topped IIT examination from my city.
And then everyone, all the newspapers, they have covered the headlines.
It is written, this person tops from this city the first time the entire country.
And how nice would the situation be?
And then for that year, the results of JEE came out.
And then when he read the newspaper, it was a shock for him.
A person from the same city had topped IIT that year.
And then he told, when I read that news, I was devastated.
I was devastated.
This devastation is a heavy word.
When a person gets devastated, when he's completely broke,
a rich man is broke, he gets devastated.
Love of life goes away.
He or she dies.
A person is devastated.
This is called devastation.
After World War, Germany got devastated.
That is called devastation.
So this person got devastated is the word he used.
Why?
Not because he failed in examination,
because other person topped that examination before him.
And it was devastating.
How can he be so happy?
How can he get so famous?
I deserve that fame.
This is called medhi, envious.
How can this person have more than me?
And this is the attitude of so-called, and eventually he also topped the country.
But he could not top the advanced.
He topped the mains, just the first examination.
But he also topped the country.
But nevertheless, he became devastated seeing other person has made it before me.
And so-called the smartest brain of the country,
he is having this mentality.
How somebody can?
And with this thing now, again, he's working hard
and he's having a startup now doing this thing.
Again, he cannot see.
Others should rise more than me in life.
In the same envy, the entire world is functioning.
Countries are functioning.
One country is envious of another country.
One friend is envious of another friend.
Relative envious of another relative.
So this is the society.
Then where is the question of peace and happiness in such a society?
Well, our heart is burning.
It is full of envy, which is called Matsaratha in Sanskrit.
So those people who have based their life out of this envy,
they are called grahamedis.
Thus, we can see almost the entire civilization today
is not full of grahasthas, but grahamedis.
And grahamedi's heart is always burning, burning, burning.
More money, more money, more money.
He should not get more than me.
She should not get more than me.
He should not get more marks.
She should not get more marks.
In this way, it is actually the envy absence of love.
Either there can be love or there can be envy.
We all want love.
Somebody should love me unconditionally.
But how is it possible, sir, you yourself cannot love anybody
unconditionally because you are envious.
Thus, a person always remains dissatisfied.
He never finds love in life because everyone is envious.
Everyone wants to show off this envious pushing morning to evening.
So thus, Srimad Bhagavatam mentions.
So there are various segments in the dharma.
And here Krishna is mentioning the topmost level of dharma.
What is that?
So this shloka is mentioned by Yamraj.
When some of his servants, they got bewildered.
That person was very, very, very sinful.
His story is mentioned in the sixth canto of Bhagavatam.
His name was Ajamil.
So this person did all kinds of wrong activities.
He had a beautiful wife.
He loved that beautiful, beautiful wife because once he was following
very nice devotional service.
Srila Prabhupada mentions he performed very advanced level of devotional service.
Very, very advanced, very, very pure service he performed.
But despite performing such pure advanced service,
once when he was going to jungle to collect woods,
he saw a Shudra and Shudrani embracing each other.
So no gentleman would have this public display of affection,
which people think is fashion of the advanced nations.
No, because they know what is the aim of this human form of life.
Aim of this human form of life is to animals also do that on the streets.
You have to regulate it.
That is called Navritti Marg.
So he saw Shudra and Shudrani.
That means untrained people, not by any caste.
It is not any caste untrained who never go to school.
They are uncultured.
They drink and all these things.
They are called Shudras.
But they also drink with regulation.
They have to do Sautramani Yajna.
And some time of the month, they can do some other Yajna.
In that way, they can eat meat on the Amavas going out of the city.
Even for consuming meat and liquor, Shudras have to follow rules and regulations.
Those who do not follow, they are called Chandalas, Malichas and others.
So actually, today's population is not even Shudra.
They are less than Shudras.
So this person saw Shudra and Shudrani drunk,
their eyes rolling and they were embracing each other.
And then his mind got agitated.
Thus it is told, this association is very, very powerful.
Either it can make us or mar us.
Thus a person should be very careful which kind of people he is associating with.
So this person then got attracted to that prostitute.
And then he brought the prostitute back to his home.
And then he left his dutiful wife.
The concept of divorce is unheard of in the Vedic culture.
A person is supposed to tolerate whatever life partner he has got.
And taking that it is my bad karma that I have got such trouble or whatever.
And he is supposed to tolerate.
But this person left his wife which is a great sin and such a dutiful wife.
And then because of associating with the prostitute
and especially eating the food cooked by the prostitute.
Thus this food is very, very important what we are taking.
Just like now, people are very, very cautious if a person is having this virus.
It touches some foods or vegetables or chapatis or water.
The water can get or the food can get contaminated from their hands or whatever.
So this is gross contamination.
There is subtle contamination also.
While cooking the food, if the person is devotee,
a person who eats the food after offering to Krishna, he'll become devotee.
If the person is angry and lusty, other person eating that food would become angry and lusty.
Thus in no respectable home, people would eat outside.
So I am speaking from Powai here in Mumbai.
It is one small place in Mumbai.
So those people who were the...
Powai was a village before.
So they were owners, landholders of Powai.
They gave land to IITs also in Powai.
They gave land to IIT in one rupee.
They gave land for all other facilities to Hiranandani which is a famous township here.
And they were the landholders.
And they would tell in our...
The culture was so strong.
Now we see so many restaurants in Powai across the country.
If we were found eating in any restaurant,
immediately my father had told,
if you find my sons eating there, immediately call me.
I'll beat them black and blue.
So we could not eat outside.
So this was the culture.
There is no question of eating outside.
Because people were knowing the science.
You are getting affected by the consciousness of the person.
So he started eating the food cooked by the Shudrani.
And thus he became...
He lost all his...
He lost all good character.
So nowadays we are very fond of ordering food on Zomato and Sugi and whatever it is.
I do not know.
And which kind of people cook these food?
They themselves eat what not.
And then they cook the food with low consciousness.
So thus our consciousness automatically will get polluted.
We are all working hard.
The husband wife both are into jobs.
And some maid is coming.
She is cooking.
And what is her consciousness?
And the same consciousness entire family will pick up.
They'll be angry, fighting, dissatisfaction, all these things.
Thus the science is not known to people.
Earlier when the travelers would go, either they would stay at house of any person
or they would eat at temples.
Whenever you go in temple for unlimited people, free of cost, there is prasadam.
This was the arrangement by the kings at that time.
So this person lost all his good character anyway.
And then he became...
He became rogue.
He became decoyed thief.
And even he started.
I think he started even killing people, if I remember correctly.
All the bad habits he started doing.
And he had many, many children.
He was very old.
I think the age is mentioned about 80 years.
But even then his lust was not pacified.
And even at that old age, this Ajamil, he begot a child.
And because Krishna...
So our devotional service process is so nice.
Srilaprabhupada mentions this bhakti yoga is so wonderful.
Once you start bhakti yoga, a person is pushed to perfection.
It is so nice.
You'll be pushed to perfection once you start this bhakti yoga.
Krishna does not leave the devotee.
He'll pull you by shikha and drag you to perfection.
So some or the other start the bhakti yoga.
So because he started this bhakti yoga, Krishna was always conscious.
Krishna was looking for a chance.
Give me some chance.
How can I pull you back?
How can I bring you back?
Krishna is so nice.
So then Krishna got a chance.
As soon as he begot the child, he wanted to name the child Naamkaran.
And Krishna inspired from his heart.
Give him the name Narayan.
So he gave him the name Narayan.
And then this person was calling him the child Narayan.
Narayan, come here.
Narayan, eat this.
Narayan, he was chanting.
In this way, sinful reactions were getting washed.
And death arrived.
He was very, very sinful.
And Yamdutas, they arrived.
And they started...
Some novice, they are not novice now.
They are there for a long time.
But so-called concocted spiritual organizations.
Unfortunately, they are very famous.
So I was there in a discussion panel on a yoga day.
So I was explaining the soul is there in the heart.
And then Krishna is also there in the heart.
There are two souls.
And then she started explaining, actually soul is here in middle of the eyebrows.
So I told, what is this?
And the audience got confused.
Sir, what is this?
You are telling the soul is in the heart.
She is telling the soul is here.
What do poor people like do?
Like us, they do.
So then I quoted some Vedas, the shlokas.
Guhayam means in the heart.
In the heart, soul is there.
So endless references are there.
So they started pulling the soul out of the heart.
And then immediately he chanted.
He became very horrified.
Yamdutas are horrible.
So immediately chanted Narayan.
Because his son Narayan was playing near to him.
And then in bewilderment, he called, maybe Narayan can save me.
The small child, hold me.
Please child, save me.
They are pulling me, these horrible people.
So as soon as he chanted Narayan, he chanted Narayan.
It utter helplessness, in great eagerness, in complete absorption.
And this is called offenseless chanting.
Without knowing that this chanting of Narayan is making me rid of my sins, he chanted Narayan.
And immediately beautiful personalities with four hands, with helmets,
they descended with sword and clubs and this lotus in their hand.
And they arrived at that place and they stopped these people.
Stop it.
And it was first instance for them.
Nobody had stopped Yamdutas before.
Nobody can stop death.
Nobody's powerful than our master Yamraj.
Everyone is bound to die.
Who are you people?
And then they were Vishnu Dutas, actually.
And then they were chased away.
You people, you go away.
From where have you come?
You do not know what is Dharma?
There was debate and they got defeated.
Then they went, Yamraj, what is this?
You are Dharma Raj and you have told us to go to that place.
We got chased very badly.
So who are those people who had come?
What is this?
So then this shloka was spoken by Yamraj.
Please understand, there are various dharmas.
You are calculating that he has broken some dharma.
So he is sinful.
So you should put him to hell and make him suffer.
But you do not know what is the topmost dharma as per the Vedas.
So there are various dharmas that a person is supposed to follow.
Various duties.
Chanakya Pandit has very nice shloka for this.
Sometimes people get stuck.
And especially, you know, sometimes when they become brahmacharis.
So the parents are not able to understand, oh, he has become brahmachari.
You're not taking care of us, not taking care of so many other things.
You are leaving your dharma.
It is your dharma to do all these things.
So, yes, it is dharma.
Chanakya Pandit says very beautiful shloka.
Chanakya Pandit says,
Tyajed means to leave.
Ekam means one member of the house.
If the kula family is in danger, one family member can be sacrificed to save the family.
Saving every member of family is the duty of the leader.
But if the family can be saved at the cost of one member, it should be done.
Saving the kula is higher dharma.
And suppose a village can be saved by sacrificing a family.
Then one family can be sacrificed for saving the village.
Saving the village is a higher duty than saving one family.
And then further he tells,
If the district or the state is in danger, then one village can be sacrificed for that.
But there is one duty which is topmost.
For self-realization, entire prithvi, entire world can be relinquished.
Atmarthe prithvi imtyajet, entire prithvi, entire world can be renounced for self-realization.
Saving the self is so important.
So nowadays we are, as Lord Jesus Christ told,
what profit a man who has gained the entire world but lost his soul.
Saving the soul is very, very important from this perpetual cycle of birth and death.
You have so much wealth, so much dharma, but you did nothing to save the self.
Saving the self means nobody can harm the self,
but the self will suffer in so many abominable situations.
So we should save the self from entering very, very miserable bodies,
which happens to the people who don't follow the dharma.
So thus the Vedas prescribe various dharma.
But Yamaraj told to his Yamdutas,
Please understand,
So for the people of this world,
The topmost dharma is what?
The topmost dharma is bhakti yoga, it is so clear.
So those people who tell any other yoga,
Any other yoga is best.
It should be followed.
I'll follow my thing, sir.
No result will come.
Yoga is a ladder Krishna mentions in 12th chapter.
You can start with karma yoga, elevate to jnana yoga, elevate to dhyana yoga.
Finally, you have to reach to bhakti yoga to fulfill the yoga process.
First semester is important, second is important.
Unless you finish the eighth semester, you will not get engineering degree.
In a similar fashion, unless somebody comes to bhakti yoga,
There is no question of perfecting the human birth which we have got.
Perfecting the existence of this world.
So Yamaraj is the topmost authority of religion, material and spiritual.
He's telling bhakti yoga for the supreme personality of Godhead.
That is the topmost religion.
And how can I do bhakti?
Some people ask.
So again Yamaraj is telling.
It starts with chanting the names of God.
So because Ajamil performed this topmost religion,
Immediately he is free of all the sinful activities.
This is the verdict of the scriptures.
So although this process seems like an ordinary process,
But it is a very very powerful process.
Yamaraj is telling.
Chanting the names of God.
From here bhakti yoga begins and that is the topmost religion.
They are called mahatmas.
So those people who do not follow this highest process,
This is called vedas are divided into three portions.
Karma kanda, gyan kanda and upasana kanda.
And the summit of upasana kanda is Vishnu upasana.
That is bhakti yoga.
So those people who cannot follow the perfection of upasana kanda,
So then they can follow gyan kanda.
As we discussed in the last class,
Those people who do gyan yajna,
They do three kinds of worship.
Some people think I am only God.
Some people think God can be imagined in various forms of various devatas.
Anyway, so you worship that is a worship of God.
Tomorrow we will see how that is not the worship of God.
And then some people who are even lesser,
They think this entire nature is God.
You simply meditate upon nature.
And this nature itself is God.
God does not have separate existence.
And those people who are even less than gyan kanda,
They follow the karma kanda.
They are very much enamored by satisfaction of mind and body sense enjoyment.
For them, these things are there.
They study the vedas.
So vedas mainly talk about karma kanda.
They drink somras.
Somras is not wine as some people tell,
See, your devatas also drink somras.
Why don't you allow them to drink wine?
Somras is not ordinary wine.
Although a wine, it comes from a creeper,
But it is heavenly thing, heavenly drink.
Although it produces some kind of intoxicating effect,
But it elongates your life.
It is nectar.
It makes your mind very strong and senses also very strong.
So that is somras.
And the demons also do intoxication.
That is liquor.
That is abominable.
So the demigods are satvik.
They cannot relish tamasic enjoyment.
Beer and liquor and all those things.
So when by samudra manthan,
The somras was produced.
It was carried in a golden pot.
And when the liquor was produced,
It was carried in iron pot.
The demons took the liquor.
They want tamasic enjoyment, rotten things.
Demigods took the somras.
So somras is not ordinary wine.
It is celestial wine,
Which makes mind and body very strong,
Although intoxicating.
So these people who are not interested in searching,
What is knowledge?
What is this life all about?
What is the soul?
Even if they understand soul,
They want to go to heavenly planets.
They follow this thing.
They study the Vedas.
They will do strict Gayatri.
They will do chant mantras very, very nicely.
They will do yajnas very nicely,
So that they can become swargir.
They can go to swarga, heavenly planets.
But this is foolishness Krishna is telling.
Why?
When they have enjoyed,
You are staying nice in a nice resort
In Dubai or Bangkok or Switzerland.
But if you run out of money,
You will have to come back.
So similarly,
When the Punya is lost,
People come back here again.
So what is the use of going to a temporary place?
You have to come back here.
But there is one category of people
Who don't come back and suffer here
In this material life.
And who are those people?
Krishna tells.
Ananya Chintayanto means meditating.
Ananya without any deviation,
Morning to evening, morning to night.
And even in dreams,
Those who are practiced in such kind of meditation.
With devotion,
Meditating on my transcendental form to them,
Something fantastic happens.
We are willing to have something in life
And willing to protect what we already have achieved in life.
But Durga or nature is very powerful.
She takes away what we have accumulated.
Name, fame, health, everything, people.
And doesn't allow us to have sometimes what we want to have.
But Krishna tells to those people
Who always meditate upon me within their heart
And worship me with devotion.
I carry what they lack and I preserve what they have.
When Krishna wants to give what you lack.
And Krishna, when he wants to preserve what you have,
Then who can do any harm to you?
Who can steal from you?
When Krishna wants to give,
Then who can stop Krishna from giving?
So thus Srila Prabhupada tells,
Only foolish people, they work very hard
To get something in this material world.
Thus Bhagavatam tells,
You want everything, you want moksha.
Or you don't want anything.
You just want to serve.
Intense devotional service you should engage yourself into.
That will bring all success to one's life.
And in the purport,
Srila Prabhupada explains another actual meaning of this.
There are two meanings.
Srila Prabhupada explains both meanings.
One in lecture, one in purport.
So in lecture, Prabhupada tells,
Even materially, Krishna will take care of your sustenance.
And spiritually, Krishna will guide you how you can approach him.
He will give proper understanding.
Yoga, how you can connect to Krishna,
Go back to eternal place where Krishna lives.
And once your spiritual life is perfect,
Krishna will make sure you never fall
For material distress in the cycle of birth and death.
So thus we are very, very fortunate.
We have come in touch with even great people.
The north of the Vedas cannot follow.
Those people who are very powerful demigods cannot follow.
After those people reaching heavenly planets,
they may develop knowledge.
After that, they may come to the platform of chanting,
which is the perfection of all religion.
So it is my humble request.
It is very simple process.
Don't think it is very simple.
It is extraordinarily powerful process.
Simply, attentively keep on chanting,
hearing, chanting, hearing,
and preferably continuously for a long time.
It takes some time to reach a meditative state.
And Prabhupada tells if you are chanting and hearing attentively,
we should be absorbed.
Our attention will be completely logged and smaranam will start.
We will be able to automatically recollect Krishna's form,
Krishna's pastimes.
That is actual chanting.
So we have to aspire, pray to Krishna to reach that stage of smaranam.
However, that will not happen artificially.
But when we chant and hear very attentively
and engage in the service of Krishna.
So thus, Krishna has given wonderful guarantee here.
One who is always thinking of me within his heart
and always engaging in my service,
I give what he lacks and I preserve what he has.
So thus, Krishna has explained the entire gradation.
The spiritual life, it begins with worshipping the demigods,
karma kanda, jnana kanda, upasana kanda,
completely meditating upon Krishna.
In this way, Krishna is telling this is the most confidential thing
and begins with worship of demigods.
Few other things are Krishna is telling here
about transfer to other planets that we will discuss tomorrow.
For now, I would like to end the session
and those who wish they can carry on.
However, I will stay online for taking some questions.
So today I will stay online till 9.15.
So kindly don't hesitate to put your questions.
Hare Krishna Prabhu.
Prabhuji, I am a member of his Konjuhu,
but don't have Guru so far.
Whom can I consider my Guru?
Srila Prabhupada tells,
you should hear a person whom you want to select as Guru,
at least for one year.
So Guru should not be seen from the eyes.
Oh, this person is, his profile is so nice.
He appears so peaceful and he appears magical.
He can perform some magic.
No, spiritual life is no magic.
Spiritual life is a science.
Just like now people are trying to find the cause of the disease.
Similarly, we have to find the cause of all the problems of life.
We have to find the cause of this entire world
and that Krishna explains,
I am the cause.
I am that eternal seed, the cause of entire manifestation.
So a person who perfectly knows the science of Krishna,
he is actually a spiritual master.
So we have to read the Bhagavad Gita
and then we have to hear whether this person is repeating
exactly the instructions of Krishna.
Krishna's knowledge is perfect.
Guru means one who can explain that perfect knowledge to us
for our understanding.
So you can hear here when you are completely convinced
this person is a pure devotee of Krishna.
He knows Krishna very nicely.
He is not doing anything,
but simply repeating the instructions of Krishna perfectly.
He is a bona fide spiritual master.
So we all in Hare Krishna movement,
except Srila Prabhupada as our spiritual master.
So you also can try to hear Srila Prabhupada
and see if you can develop faith in him.
And far as my personal opinion is concerned,
I don't find any other person who is qualified
to become spiritual master in this age as of now,
apart from Srila Prabhupada.
Prabhuji, ek important point reh gaya tha
jo aapne bola ki kal discuss karenge.
Ye point kal discuss karenge.
Tomorrow never dies.
So start your devotional life today itself.
Hare Krishna Prabhu,
even though a person is happy with minimalism,
his parents may force not to be so.
They have their expectations of having own house
and other luxuries in such situation.
How can such person help himself?
His parents may not be so okay.
So the question being asked is parents may not understand.
I want to have minimalistic life.
Parents are telling, no, no, you should have big car.
You should have a big house.
So you can try to educate the parents
just like you are not willing to go to school.
You are crying and they sent you to school.
Now, if you follow a simple life,
then they may do this thing.
Or you can have other process also.
Two things are there.
So about this minimalistic life also,
we need a little more clarity.
This is also very important.
I'll write on my board.
I'll explain tomorrow.
Although minimalistic life is a great asset
for spiritual advancement,
but a minimalistic life can be great maya also,
which can stop you from spiritual advancement.
So we will discuss about this point tomorrow.
Hare Krishna Prabhu,
we are too much disturbed by covid virus in India.
So I think it's not good to live in this planet anymore.
Please help us to get out of this hell.
Is it possible in this life to be happy and enjoy properly?
Please explain.
Yes.
So Prabhu, this is horrible now.
What to do?
So if we go to other planet
and if we have not got rid of the past sinful activities,
misery will chase us on the other planet also.
So it is not the planet which is the cause of our suffering.
It is not the person or it is not virus per se
or anything which is cause of our suffering.
Just like a person in Tihar jail may think,
oh, if I run out of this Tihar jail,
I'll be very, very happy.
No, sir.
If you have committed crime,
if you run out of one jail,
you'll be put back in same jail or another jail.
Nature or the laws will force us to suffer.
So that is why the solution is not even to change the planet.
A pure devotee on this planet can have perfect happiness,
unlimited happiness in midst of all corona and everything.
So what is the solution?
The solution is
forget all so-called lower religions,
what you have concocted in your mind,
follow the highest religion,
completely surrender yourself unto Krishna.
Simply follow morning to evening what Krishna prescribes in Bhagavad Gita.
That is called surrender.
As soon as we surrender from that point,
we are free of the sinful life.
And thus, whether we live on this planet or other planet,
we are completely happy.
So surrendering to Krishna is solution.
So we'll be happy here in this life.
And after this, we are off to spiritual planet.
No more trouble.
Hare Krishna Prabhu.
I am a lawyer living in Dehradun.
Most welcome to you.
It is very nice to have you here.
Is there any way to purify the consciousness of food
order via Zomato and Swiggy?
For ordinary people, there is no way.
But for the preachers, there is a way.
There is an injunction in the Vedas.
Srila Prabhupada explains.
If you pay for something, it gets purified.
So when you are preaching Krishna consciousness,
you are traveling.
And no food is available.
Devotee tries to carry, tries to manage with food, fruits,
and milk, and whatever.
Still, you are there for a very long time.
And it's not possible.
Then you can have food without onion, garlic,
that to none all these things.
Without onion, garlic, pure vegetarian food.
And you can pay for it.
And that you can offer in mind.
And then you can take.
Then you will be saved from the contamination.
But only in exceptional circumstances,
when you are out for preaching, when you are out
for spreading Krishna consciousness
in service of Krishna.
Otherwise, there is no solution.
We have to cook for ourselves and offer to Krishna.
That is the only way.
What of the vegetables milk we buy from the market?
If that is grown, sold by a Shudra, will we be affected?
Grown, sold is not very important.
Cooking is important.
So the cooking should be done by a devotee
who is chanting regularly,
who is actually initiated devotee ideally,
who is following all the rules and regulations very, very nicely.
Because then only Krishna accepts the offerings.
However, start chanting pray to Krishna.
Krishna, I cannot do immediately.
Please understand my conditioning.
Nevertheless, please try to accept this food.
Soon I'll try to follow perfectly all the rules.
In this mood, start offering as much as possible.
If all the food cannot be offered, take something.
Maybe you can have some milk or Krishna tells,
offer me a glass of water itself.
Put one Tulsi leaf offering mantras.
You'll find offering procedure on the internet.
Simply put in front of Krishna.
Take prasadam water every day.
Start with that.
So purchasing from Shudra is not an issue or something.
And actually, everyone is Shudra.
Anybody who is doing job is a Shudra.
Shudra never does a job.
So thus, in that way, anybody who takes salary is a Shudra.
So everyone is Shudra.
Janmana Jayate Shudra.
By birth, everyone is Shudra.
By sanskaras, he becomes.
By purification, he advances.
No sanskara.
So Kalyug, everyone is Shudra.
Or less than Shudra, Chandal and Milichha.
That is today's civilization.
Here in Dehradun, toxication is crossing its limit.
Our colleagues provokes us to try this.
Even they pressurize me many times.
But I leave them usually.
Is this the only way to escape from this toxic influence?
Or I should leave Dehradun?
No.
Every place is there like that.
Dehradun or this place, wherever you go.
So try to find some devotees of Hare Krishna movement.
It's gone.
Who are practicing over there?
Try to associate with them.
I'm sure some devotees would be there.
If they are not there, stay put.
Keep in touch with us.
And very soon, we will tell you how to create a Krishna conscious atmosphere wherever you are living.
But it is very, very important not to associate with such people.
Stop such socializing.
It is very, very dangerous.
If they ask why you're not socializing with us, tell them human life is meant to fulfill a purpose.
And you are going, sorry, against the purpose.
And if at all you want to, whenever you realize your mistake, please come to me.
I will show you the right thing.
So don't socialize.
Don't mind.
Just like the atheists are very expert in socializing, they'll simply deny.
But we are scared.
Oh, how can I tell?
I will not come with you.
No, we should not be scared.
Do not socialize at all with the drunkards and smokers.
It is told it is better to lock yourself in a cage surrounded by fire rather than associating with a person who is very much attached to material life.
What to speak of, you know, he's into intoxication and all.
Do not associate at all simply by associating with them.
We come in lower modes.
However, you'll find devotees everywhere.
Some research you have to do.
Hare Krishna.
Prabhu, please explain how to understand Krishna and Vishnu and how to understand who is superior.
Please explain that I've been explaining in all these sessions.
And once these sessions are finished, now we are doing nine chapter of Bhagavad Gita.
We'll start session from ground zero.
Those people who are very new know nothing of Krishna consciousness.
We'll start modules for them.
So you can hear Raj with their try to understand as much as possible.
And all these questions will be answered in future modules after April 14th.
Hare Krishna.
Prabhuji, I want to ask how to remember Bhagavad Gita and all of the Sanskrit shloka.
What is the method?
We have to follow Brahmacharya strictly.
Memory becomes very strong when we follow Brahmacharya.
And after that, try to hear very, very attentively.
So now our memory is very poor.
We cannot have photographic memory like previous ages.
But if you follow Brahmacharya, it can work at an optimal level.
And every day try to hear lecture of Srila Prabhupada.
Prabhupada Vani is the website.
You can visit Prabhupada Vani and try to hear Prabhupada lectures, Prabhupada quotes.
Even personally, I never spend much time in memorizing the shlokas.
But whatever I learn, that is simply because I hear attentively Prabhupada lectures every day.
So you can practice this.
And when you hear over and over again and preach to others, explain to others,
whatever you have learned that shloka, write it down, explain to one person, friend, family member.
So in this way, you can memorize.
And if you can chant also, that is also very nice.
Chant one chapter of Bhagavad Gita in the morning, unless you have done it by heart.
That is also one way of doing it.
Hare Krishna Prabhu, can you please repeat what Chana Ke Pandit says?
Chana Ke Pandit said,
For one person, Kulam Tyajet.
One person can be sacrificed for protection of the family.
And one family can be sacrificed for Gram.
Gramasya Arthe Kulam Tyajet.
And Gramam Janapadasya Arthe.
Village can be sacrificed to save a state or a district.
And Atmanam, for self, for self-realization, Prithveem Tyajet.
For self-realization, everything can be sacrificed.
Self-realization was so important.
This is spoken by Chana Ke Pandit, the leading educator of the first university of the entire world.
Indradev is also a great politician.
He will not give us citizenship permanently to drink Somrasa.
And reading books is not sufficient.
Yes, Indra will not allow you.
Somrasa is also meant for very high category of demigods.
But Krishna Consciousness takes you even to a higher position.
Pranam, if our nature is determined by our past Karma, what is the role of free will?
Wouldn't our free will to get affected by that nature?
Very nice question.
So our nature depends on past Karma.
Our anger, frustration after failure, lust, greed, liking, disliking.
All these things we take from the past life.
Now I've got body of crow.
I'm naturally attracted to filthy things.
I am helplessly drawn towards it.
Yes, a crow is completely helpless.
But we have little freedom.
That little freedom, if we use rightly, then we'll get more freedom.
That more freedom we use even rightly, we get even more freedom.
So in this way, completely liberation is not possible immediately,
that you are completely free tomorrow onwards.
But whatever scope we have, it may not be possible to chant always or chant 16 rounds.
But 10 minutes we can chant, one round we can chant every day.
Don't reduce that.
If you chant one round, Krishna will give facility to chant two rounds.
Then don't reduce that, Prabhupada.
Chant two rounds, Krishna will give four, 16.
And then he will liberate you completely.
So in this way, your right nature is very, very overwhelming.
So Kapil Muni, in that purport in Bhagavatam, it is mentioned nicely by Prabhupada.
We have to persevere.
We may fail, nature would be strong.
But if you show your struggle praying to Krishna, chanting nicely every day,
Krishna will slowly increase your freedom.
But don't use it wrongly.
I have freedom for chanting one round and I don't do it every day.
Then my existing freedom also will be curtailed.
Simple example is just like modern education.
A boy from second grade can go to third grade.
He cannot immediately be matriculate or postgraduate, no.
Or he can stay back in the same class if he doesn't perform.
That is a freedom.
So he goes to third grade.
He goes to fourth grade.
Then 10th grade, more freedom, either bio or this thing or arts he can choose.
Then more freedom.
In this way, freedom expands.
Hare Krishna, Prabhuji, depending on gunas, sattva, tamo or raja,
different puranas, different scriptures are recommended
so that advancement can only happen gradually.
Then why all of us are on the same path right now?
Very good question again.
Because now that gradual process, pravritti marga is not possible.
The time is very, very less now.
Like a typical example is that of Vishwamitra Muni.
Vishwamitra Muni was a kshatriya before.
Those who are from south, they must be knowing the wonderful suprabhatam prayers.
They are composed by Vishwamitra to wake up Lord Ramachandra.
So Vishwamitra Muni was a king and when he visited the ashram of Vashisht
and then he saw what is the power of Brahmana.
He was having a surubhi cow.
The cow was producing instant food for all of his army.
And when he wanted to capture the cow forcefully, the cow produced army also.
And that army defeated entire Vishwamitra's army.
So he got, my God, what is this cow?
It can produce unlimited food items.
It can produce army.
That was kamdhenu cow, surubhi.
You don't know.
My God, Brahmanas are so powerful.
I should also become Brahmana.
Then from kshatriya, he became Brahmana after thousands and thousands of years of meditation.
I think 50,000-60,000 years he also meditated.
So where is life now?
Thousands of years.
We live hardly 100 years.
Earlier people would live for one lakh years in satyoga.
So you can dedicate 60,000 years to meditate.
Now where is time?
So that is why in Kalyuga, mind-body doesn't support to follow gradual process.
And we have to go to jungle.
We cannot move out of our flat quarantined.
How you can go to jungle and do some tapasya?
So in Kalyuga, you can do simply chanting wherever you are,
either hospital or in your room.
Either corona without corona.
Chanting is always possible.
So thus, because of the situation in Kalyuga,
it is told,
it is not my or anybody's concoction.
Shastras mention,
There is no other way.
Prabhuji,
there is one important point left which we will discuss tomorrow.
Before Krishna Consciousness,
I was a Shiva devotee feeling guilty to abandon Lord Shiva and join Lord Krishna.
No, don't feel guilty.
Just like somebody can tell if he tells,
Prabhuji, I was hearing your lecture everyday
and now I am hearing Prabhupada's lecture.
I have not been able to hear your lectures.
I am feeling guilty.
So please don't feel guilty.
I will be more than happy you have advanced.
In fact, I am very embarrassed to give lectures.
I don't have many advanced realizations.
Nothing in compared to Prabhupada.
But because Prabhupada has told us,
and Prabhupada tells,
if my disciples are sincere,
then the disciple's lecture will also have the same effect.
So we are just trying to be sincere
and follow Srila Prabhupada's instructions.
Otherwise, I tell everyone,
you please hear Prabhupada's lecture every day.
Transcendental voice.
Simply hear perfectly.
You are not understanding the meaning.
Does not matter.
Simply by lending attentive hearing,
you will be liberated.
You will realize Krishna immediately.
So just like if somebody follows Prabhupada
and stops hearing me,
I'll be more than happy.
I'll be very glad
that my preaching is successful.
Somebody got connected to Prabhupada.
So my duty is to connect you all to Prabhupada.
If always you keep on hearing me,
means you have not advanced sufficiently.
So thus Lord Shiva becomes very, very happy.
So if you have been devotee of Lord Shiva,
so you can ask Lord Shiva.
I was also devotee of Lord Shiva.
I was also chanting Om Navah Shivaya
before every day,
before I chanted Hare Krishna Mantra.
But it is told in the Shastra,
Vaishnavanam Yatha Shambhu.
There is no Vaishnava like Lord Shiva.
And this Hare Krishna Mantra,
word by word,
Lord Shiva teaches to Parvati Mata,
my dear Parvati,
please chant Hare Krishna,
Hare Krishna.
She chants Hare Krishna,
Hare Krishna.
So so many references are there.
And then it is also told,
Uma kaho mai anubhav apna
Sath harinam jagat sapsapna
Sath harinam jagat sapsapna
Lord Shiva is telling to Uma, Parvati.
So endless instructions are there.
So Lord Shiva is more than pleased.
So this story,
one very interesting story about this is there.
This also I will share tomorrow.
Hare Krishna,
Prabhu,
shall we chant with some hope
to get something good from Krishna?
Yes, we should chant to get the,
not something good.
We should chant to get the best thing from Krishna.
Good things Krishna gives easily,
so-called good things of material world.
Krishna will give you money.
Krishna will give you fame.
Krishna will give you this thing.
But then you will be deprived of the best thing.
The best thing is getting love for Krishna.
That satisfies our heart.
So thus simply ask for Krishna.
Krishna, please engage me
in your loving devotional service.
Here also,
how much love a person feels, isn't it?
Newly wed couple.
Wife becomes so happy
to feed new new dishes to the husband.
So it is troublesome to chop the vegetables
and cook it.
It is very hot in the kitchen
and then feed the husband.
But so much pleasure she derives.
Why?
There is so much pleasure in seva.
The dog is standing, passing stool
and the man is standing like guard.
Okay, you please pass.
I'm your servant.
So why is serving dog like this?
Because there's pleasure in serving the dog also.
When dog comes to you and licks your feet,
it is pleasurable.
But there is no service pleasurable like
service of Krishna.
So if at all you are chanting,
don't demand for lower things.
Simply demand,
please engage me in your loving devotional service.
That is success of life.
Hare Krishna Prabhuji,
I want to ask how to remember Bhagavad Gita
and all other I just explained.
If we chant for cut,
if we chant for cut our birth and death cycle,
then it seems like we are dealing with Krishna.
How can worship our supreme personality
without ambition?
Very nice question.
So actually,
we tell to stop the process of birth and death
because people are willing to have some results.
So this is bona fide desire you can have.
However,
when the devotee becomes advanced,
he does not ask,
he does not have this desire also.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu tells,
I do not have material desire.
I don't want liberation also.
You want me to take birth,
let me take birth over and over again.
But let me engage in your service.
So that's actually,
we should not even ask Krishna
to get us rid of birth and death,
but simply engage me in your service wherever I am.
Because when a person engages in service of Krishna,
then immediately he is on spiritual platform.
He is in spiritual world,
even though his body apparently is in material world.
He is enjoying the spiritual bliss.
So this is actually very nice question.
Just ask Krishna,
please engage me in your service.
What is the benefit of getting up early?
I explained yesterday
and I have been explaining.
Coming to Satvaguna is very important
to understand and appreciate spiritual life nicely.
Just like a child cannot understand politics,
higher subject matters, science.
He can only understand eating is good for me.
I should eat somehow and play.
Similarly, if we need to understand
the spiritual subject matter nicely,
what is body?
What is soul?
How am I soul different from body?
I am eternal and all these things.
Then we have to be on Satvaguna.
And getting up early is very important
because morning times are charged with Satvaguna.
So if we are awake at that time,
the Satvaguna, our body becomes
surcharged with Satvaguna.
So it is the first principle,
getting up early in the morning
and chanting very nicely
to rise to Satvaguna and transcend that stage.
So thus our life should be very very sattvic.
Sattvic food, sattvic sleep,
meeting with sattvic people,
living in a sattvic place.
When we are surrounded by Satvaguna,
then very whole spiritual life
will be very very clear.
There won't be any confusion.
Hare Krishna, Prabhu.
This is my second lecture.
Most welcome.
Prabhuji, could you please share the recording
of all lecture if available or recorded?
I will share after this workshop is open,
is over definitely after April 14th.
Now if I share the bowling,
ha Prabhu share kar di ja.
I got little busy.
I'll hear when I get time.
So I'll share after April 14th.
Prabhuji, I want to focus on chanting non-stop
for 16 rounds,
but when reversing beads after one round
and starting with Jai Shri Krishna mantra again,
I lose the same flow and connect.
Please guide how to do non-stop 16 rounds,
even with reversing and chanting main mantra
on first bead if so required.
It will happen.
Practice.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's blessing you are seeking
that will not deviate you rather
increase your attention.
So Pancha Tattva mantra also chant with great attention.
Then you will realize.
Now maybe you are not realizing
who is Chaitanya Mahaprabhu?
What is this Pancha Tattva mantra?
It is very nice to keep associating with them.
Every day we spend some time discussing
so-called negative things happening around
our envy, greed, corona, etc.
In negativity and fear,
it seems easier to surrender to God temporarily.
Is that why we focus on these things in our discussion?
Yes.
So be positive is just like I was speaking in one college
and the crowd was very good.
I was not expecting so many people to turn up.
So they asked, I asked them rather that
what brings all of you here
and why have you come up here for?
So one girl, she replied that to get motivated.
We have come here, you know,
generally people give motivational speeches
and these are spiritualists also.
They are more of motivational speakers
because they think if I speak hardcore spirituality,
I will not get many followers.
But Prabhupada told Prabhupada had an invitation for Madras
and it was all in the news.
Prabhupada is coming.
Prabhupada was eminent personality.
When Prabhupada would come to India,
mayors would go receive with garlands.
When he would walk in the street, shops would close.
And you know, it was so nice.
So but then this person heard Prabhupada and what is this?
This person is so much critical.
He's criticizing everything.
So if I organize this program
and he had agreed to organize it there in the news,
suddenly it tells I cannot call Sheila Prabhupada.
I'm sorry.
So Prabhupada told, yes, this is fact.
Rather, I am the only person in India, Prabhupada told,
who is criticizing the worship of demigods.
No other person will criticize
the worship of other demigods, devatas.
Yes, whatever you want, you can worship.
You'll get the same result.
We'll see in the next class how Krishna is telling.
No result is not the same.
So Prabhupada told and not just demigod worship.
I am critical of everything
that falls short of complete surrender to Krishna.
Just like unless you appear in your last exam,
you will not get your degree.
So a person who has not taken admission to college
and a person who has not appeared in his last exam,
both are on the same level.
They are degree less.
In a similar fashion, the Vedas tell.
The follower of the Vedas who have strong faith,
who know all demigods, devatas, everything,
and those people who are atheists,
they are equally illusioned
unless they come to the platform of surrendering to Krishna.
They're equally illusioned.
Somebody's illusion is Satvaguna.
Another person is illusioned in Tamaguna.
But both are in their illusion.
So unless a person gives the final exam,
the top most religion,
he will not be satisfied.
He will not get that happiness
for which he is always hankering.
So Prabhupada told,
I always criticize anything
that falls short of complete surrender to Krishna.
Vedas tell other things for gradual elevation.
But Prabhupada, the life is very,
very small span we have here.
So without any slow process,
we need to finish it very fast.
So Prabhupada told,
my Guru Maharaj never compromised.
I will never compromise
and my disciples also should never compromise.
So thus people may take interest,
may not take interest.
Some people because of their past life,
past credits,
will be able to appreciate this knowledge.
But somebody should be there
who is preaching spirituality as it is.
And then Prabhupada told,
Shuddhghi, if you sell,
people would purchase.
So if you speak,
original message as it is,
takers may be less,
but some people will take it.
So speak without any compromise.
So thus I told that Mataji
that you are at the wrong place.
I have not come here to motivate.
I have come here to demotivate.
And if you read Bhagavad Gita,
you'll find Krishna is biggest demotivator.
Krishna is telling,
this world is Dukhalayam Arjuna.
It is full of misery.
Motivation speakers tell,
oh, yes, you can win.
This world is beautiful.
And yes, you can win.
You can do this thing.
But Krishna tells Arjuna,
this world is Dukhalayam
or it is full of misery.
Krishna is telling over and over again.
So thus Krishna is telling,
Krishna is just like if a person
is very nicely eating his favorite dish,
sitting on the railway track,
we need to tell him foolish,
you will die.
People die on this railway track.
We should not tell,
no, no, sometimes people die,
sometimes they roam,
he will die.
So thus we need to tell this with urgency.
And it is a fact.
Prabhupada tells,
if you can tell a person,
excuse me,
he will give you way
and you can carry on.
If you tell a bull,
sir, excuse me,
can I cross the street?
Bull will not hear.
So in a similar fashion,
bull has to be whipped.
So in a similar fashion,
people have become so dull.
These miseries,
they are very, very important
to suffer from the miseries
and to discuss about the miseries.
Actually, it is a bona fide way
to develop detachment
from this material world.
Thus, we discuss these things.
But we don't just discuss that.
We discuss the positive life also.
Devotees always happy
by following this process.
So we should be negative
about the wrong things
and we should be positive
about the right things.
Always being positive
is theory of ignorance.
Prabhuji, what is Sankhya Yoga
as described in Bhagavad Gita?
Sankhya Yoga
as described in Bhagavad Gita,
it is a process of
meditating upon Lord Krishna
within the heart,
following Yamnya, Masana, Pranayama,
all the elements of Ashtanga Yoga.
And Sankhya Yoga,
Shri Prabhupada explains,
this is more elaborately explained
in Shrimad Bhagavatam,
third canto.
So Shri Prabhupada explains,
it is a mix of knowledge
as well as meditative process.
That is called Sankhya Yoga.
Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 9,
previous lectures
that you have taken, Prabhuji.
Yes, yes, I will share with you
after this is over.
Prabhuji, you are confusing
on one side, okay?
You are saying hard work
should not be done.
Everything Krishna gives.
But Krishna told Arjuna to do karma,
first fight war and then win the war.
So I am sorry if I confused you.
Spiritual life appears to be confusing
and your question,
the same question was asked by
Arjuna to Krishna.
That Krishna, you are telling
we should not work very hard
to enjoy this world
and we should be satisfied
with whatever comes.
And as per destiny, things are fixed.
Then Krishna, why you are telling me to fight?
You are confusing me, Krishna.
So then Krishna explained to Arjuna
that hard work should not be done
for sense gratification,
but hard work should be done
for the service of Krishna.
Without hard work,
we cannot live, especially in Kali Yuga.
So hard work is required,
but not for sense gratification
for service of Krishna.
Hard work should not be done
by terrorists, but by soldiers.
Hare Krishna, Prabhu Dandavat.
Oh my God, I am so sorry.
It is 9.25.
I got carried away
by the nice questions.
So please allow me to
take this question some other time.
Hare Krishna, Prabhu,
please extend your lecture
in the morning time too.
In the morning, I am also hearing
lecture of Prabhupada.
So you can also hear
lecture of Prabhupada.
So it is a very nice morning.
You hear Prabhupada in the evening.
I will try to explain.
So thank you so much for hearing.
We'll meet again tomorrow
with these important points.
Miluministic life
and story about Lord Shiva,
how he guided one of his devotees.
So please keep chanting always
as much as possible.
