Chapter number 10, Opulence of the Absolute, text number 12 and 13.
Translation, Arjuna said, You are the supreme Brahma, the ultimate, the supreme abode and purifier,
the absolute truth and the eternal divine person. You are the primal God, transcendental and original,
and you are the unborn and all-pervading beauty. All the great sages such as Narada, Asit, Deval and Vyas
proclaim this of you and now you yourself are declaring it to me.
Let us see next verse also and then we will discuss.
O Krishna, I totally accept as truth all that you have told me, neither the gods nor demons, O Lord,
know thy personality.
Indeed, you alone know yourself by your own potencies, O origin of all, Lord of all beings,
God of gods, O supreme person, Lord of the universe.
So few very important words are used here.
So Namacharya Shri Haridas Thakur was having a discussion in the assembly of very rich landlords of Bengal.
And in the assembly was one of their appointed tax collectors by the name Gopal Chakravarti.
So Namacharya Haridas Thakur, who is he? Most of you must be knowing, those who are not aware.
Haridas Thakur is a very extraordinary personality and he is called Namacharya.
He was born in a Muslim family, but still from his very early days,
he was always exhibiting the symptoms of pure devotional service.
And later on, he came to be known as Namacharya. The Acharya means the spiritual master of the holy name.
So Haridas Thakur is called Namacharya because he exemplified the chanting of the holy name by his personal character.
So Haridas Thakur was so much advanced and liberated in chanting of the holy names
that he would simply chant, chant and chant entire day and night, 24 hours.
So we are supposed to do many activities in the day. We are supposed to, at least in the maintenance of the body,
so much of time is gone. A normal human being sleeps around six, seven or eight hours.
And then you have to arrange food, you have to do some job to eat.
But Haridas Thakur, 24 hours he would practically chant.
If somehow some arrangement is there, somebody comes and gives some food he would take after his chanting is over.
Otherwise, sometimes he would forgo even that.
Plus practically almost no sleeping, no eating. He simply chanting on and on continuously.
And in this way, he was completely liberated.
So when Haridas Thakur was there in the assembly,
so the people realized that now we are very fortunate. We have with us presence of a very great personality.
So this personality has surpassed the biological demands also.
So this is why Krishna comes and he sends forth his liberated pure devotees
to tell us that what is the perfection of this human form of life.
Everything has got a certain use.
So this computer on which we are having this class now,
this can be also used for various purposes or some of you must be hearing on your cell phone devices.
The cell phone can also be used for various purposes.
Somebody can use simply as a digital clock, just like I am using my cell phone to see the time here.
But if a person simply uses his cell phone as a clock, that is not the optimal usage of the cell phone.
Digital clock is very cheap, but cell phone, it is a mini computer.
You can do many more wonderful things out of it.
Similarly, human form of life, the Vedas implore, they request,
please do not waste this human form of life simply for the enjoyment of senses.
Human life is meant to attain a very high standard of happiness.
This other sense pleasures are available in every form.
So this human form, it is very, very rare.
So after transmigration through many species, the living entity gets this body, this machine,
in which you can do something which is not performed in other bodies.
In other bodies, you can eat, you can sleep, you can mate much better than the human body.
So human body is meant for a different purpose.
And what is that purpose? To enjoy unlimited happiness.
What is that unlimited happiness?
So Bhagavad Gita, these scriptures, people are telling, oh, it will restrict my life.
No, it is not going to restrict.
It is opening the doors of unlimited happiness.
And to help us attain that platform, some restriction initially is required.
But Bhagavad Gita tells,
the actual unlimited happiness, antikam means which is subjected to end,
atyantikam means endless, eternal happiness.
Here every happiness has got an end, but we want happiness which should not end at all.
So that kind of happiness is not possible on physical platform.
That is possible on spiritual platform.
Oh, it is all theory. Who has done that?
There is some evidence.
Yes, that is why Krishna comes along with those beings who have known
how to optimally utilize this body and they are the pure devotees of Krishna.
And thus Haridas Thakur, he showed by his example,
See, this is the real pleasure which you should aspire for in this human form of life.
So Haridas Thakur was getting such extraordinary pleasure while chanting
that he surpassed all the biological laws also.
So it is a law and so many things are there in the world around us.
We are subjected to them.
But Haridas Thakur surpassed everything.
Haridas Thakur would not eat, he would hardly sleep.
And even if you try to harm him physically, he would not show any symptoms of pain.
You throw him in the water for a couple of days, he would be there inside
and then suddenly you would see him walking, completely transcendental.
No lust, women are coming and they are trying to entice him in the middle of the night.
He is young, 24 years in the jungle, not getting enticed at all.
The snake is living in the same cave where Haridas Thakur is there.
A snake is there in the same room where we are hearing this lecture now.
We cannot imagine paying any attention.
We will run away from the place.
But Haridas Thakur, he is completely absorbed in meditation.
He is able to meditate and chant holy name in the presence of big snake in the same den,
same cave which he was using.
Complete freedom from fear, lust, anger and biological demands.
This was exhibited by Haridas Thakur.
So they wanted to hear from Haridas Thakur that
please tell us something about the holy name, the glories of the holy name
by which we have attained such an advanced platform of life.
So then they all started discussing various evidences from the Vedas.
Somebody told holy name attains this.
You get knowledge from the holy name.
Somebody is telling by chanting holy name you get freedom from all the sinful reactions.
Somebody is telling you get liberation by chanting the holy name.
So Haridas Thakur wanted to bring this very important point to them
that please do not underestimate the value of the holy name.
So this word that we see here,
arjuna uvaca param brahma param dhama param brahma
So this brahma, this is any spiritualist,
he is very well aware of this word which is called brahma.
Brahma means the substance which is the source of this consciousness
which animates this entire body.
So human life is meant at least to understand aham brahmasmi.
I am not this body. I am spirit soul.
So as soon as a human being understands this at least
so the perfection of his life begins from there.
And all the problems are immediately solved when a person realizes that he is not the body.
Now all the problems are there because we think I am the body
and then we get carried away by the demands of the body
and work very hard to satisfy it.
But if a person understands I am eternal,
so what I am thinking this is good, this is bad,
these are all the perceptions created by the body.
This is not reality.
Everybody perceives something as good, another thing as bad,
different species, fish, bear, human being, lizard.
For them perception of happiness, distress is different.
These are all perceptions created by the touch sensation, the body, the senses.
So I consider somebody as my enemy, I consider somebody as my friend
and behave accordingly, differently.
These are all illusions. I am not the body only.
Just like a traveler, I am there here for a short while
and I will carry on in my journey.
So brahmabhuta prasannatma.
Jeevabhuta means when a person thinks I am the body.
Brahmabhuta means when a person thinks I am not the body, I am spirit soul.
So in order to become happy, we need not acquire money, fame, riches, strength or anything X, Y, Z.
Rather these things will only create complications in our life.
But in order to become happy, we need to realize this brahmagyan.
Brahmagyan means understanding I am not the body.
And it is compared to a person waking up from dream.
As soon as a person wakes up, then there is no problem at all.
Immediately everything is solved.
All the things he was fearful of, all the false imaginations and success he was planning in the dream.
He understands it was a waste. I was hallucinating.
Similarly, now we are hallucinating, working very hard.
Let me climb in the corporate ladder. Let me have a business.
Let me have this person, the love of my life and I'll be happy.
And all these wrong concepts we have created in our life.
View to wrong education system, media, Bollywood, Hollywood and X, Y, Z.
And thus by this thing, we are all suffering in life.
And unfortunately, because there is no discussion about this brahmagyan, this subject matter,
people think only I am suffering because I have not got the right kind of job,
the right kind of country, the right kind of house, the right kind of people, spouse or family around me.
So by adjustment, I'll be happy. They don't understand the whole world is trying to adjust.
And nobody, even Lord Brahma is happy by this arrangement.
So everybody is suffering, but he thinks I am suffering, but this person is not suffering.
See his profile. He is successful. He is enjoying. This is illusion.
Everybody is suffering.
So happiness is possible, not by attainment of material objectives, but by attainment of brahmagyan.
So when a person understands brahmabhuta, I am spirit soul, prasannatma, he immediately becomes very, very happy.
Na shocati na kanksati.
Then he has no lamentation in life that I have lost something.
He understands this world is temporary, hallucination.
Na kanksati, nor does he hanker anything for a few things which only create complications and distress in our life.
So he is always happy, brahmabhuta.
So Haridas Hakur told, this platform brahmabhuta stage, which is very, very rare,
which only the brahmanas are supposed to attain, the human society in Vedic culture is classified in varnashrama system.
It begins with sudras.
Many human beings are also there. Not everyone qualifies even for varnashrama.
Less than sudras are chandalas, the dog eaters.
Then kirat, ahun, andhra, pulinda, pulkasha, abhira, shumba, yavana, khasadya, pig eater and other things.
And so many other tribes are there whose consciousness is very, very tamasic like that of animals.
So even though they eat meat and other things, they don't incursion because their consciousness is very low.
They don't qualify for varnashrama, the progressive system by which they can understand they are not the body.
So it is not easy to come to this platform.
It takes many, many lifetimes of training to understand that I am not the body,
this practical realization, dissociating yourself with this concept.
So it begins with sudra.
Sudra has to follow some basic rules and regulations, but he will be crying for small things.
He will be disturbed very easily if a person, he is strongly in the bodily concept of life,
but somehow he shows some qualification, so he is admitted into varnashrama system.
Then comes vaishya, mercantile class, farmers, traders, then kshatriyas, the rulers, administrators.
Then comes brahmana. What is brahmana?
Brahma janati iti brahmana, janmana jayate sudra.
By birth, everyone is sudra. Veda pathe diyo vipra.
Then he is supposed to read Vedas.
This is the first thing human beings should do in life.
And by reading the Vedas, as we discussed in the previous session,
any writing, it has got some material configuration of the alphabets,
just like somebody may write very beautifully.
And a person who is illiterate or ignorant, simply by seeing the beautiful words written over there,
he will tell, oh, what beautiful writing it is, what beautiful words it is,
because he cannot appreciate anything beyond the handwriting.
But a person who is intellectual, he will be able to access the intellectual stuff behind those written words.
And then he tells writing is good, but stuff is nonsense.
There is no intellectual content in this.
In a similar fashion, these words of the Vedic literatures, beyond the material composition,
it could be very beautifully rhyming, it could be having very perfect meters,
but it is told about Shrimad Bhagavatam,
The Vedas follow very strict meters calculations for writing the verses,
but Bhagavatam does not strictly adhere to such rules and regulations.
But it is told even though such verses are imperfectly composed,
it creates a revolution in the life of the masses,
because the spiritual stuff, which lies even beyond the intellectual stuff carried by those lines,
instructions, it is very, very powerful.
And just like the wonderful instructions of physics written in English language
can be accessed not with the help of English teacher, but with the help of a physics teacher,
and then the person enlightens in the knowledge of physics in a similar fashion,
and not with the help of a Sanskrit teacher or some other mundane intellectual scholar
who has picked up Bhagavad Gita and written a commentary.
No, who is who has no other material demand in his life.
That person who is devotee of Krishna, he is able to properly decipher, understand the mood of Krishna
and under the guidance of such a spiritual master, if a person reads Bhagavad Gita,
there is a revolution in the life.
He immediately there is a 180 degree shift in his consciousness
rather than enjoying the senses.
He understands no life is meant for some other purpose.
Immediately there is a realization in life and there is a change in consciousness and activities.
So by reading the Vedas, a person becomes Vipra scholar.
And then if he is able to access that spiritual content behind the Vedas,
he is called Brahma Janati.
If he has realized Brahma, then Brahmana.
This is the purpose of all Vedic knowledge, at least to push a person,
elevate a person to spiritual platform.
Understanding is different from the body.
So this Brahmana platform is very, very rare.
After many, many lies a person, Shudra may become Vaishya, he may become Kshatriya, then Brahmana,
then he may realize it.
And this is the training given in the Gurukul, Brahmachari.
What is Brahmachari?
Brahmacharati iti Brahmachari, who is trained to behave on spiritual platform,
control the senses very, very nicely.
So people follow various practices to come to this platform.
Some people follow the process of Jnana Yoga.
So by understanding, discussing, analyzing the Vedic knowledge,
that you are rushing after sense pleasures,
but how long does the pleasure stay when the food is there in your mouth?
There is pleasure only for a few moments,
but you get addicted to that food stuff and then you have to work very hard
and so many other troubles you have in life.
Sex pleasure is for a few moments, but just to fulfill that,
so many responsibilities and so much other troubles you have to take.
And then when you enjoy that again, even though it lasts for a few moments,
but the hankering always increases.
In this way, people discuss the disadvantage of sensual pleasure,
by this they abstain from sensual activities.
Abstaining from sensual activities is very important to realize our true identity.
Srila Prabhupada gives the example, just like you throw a stone in the water.
So the stone has gone to the bottom.
If you want to see the stone, then you have to wait for the water to be settled.
If the water is agitated, you cannot see the bottom clearly.
In a similar fashion, the soul is lying deep within the body.
If you have to realize the actual substance,
then the body and the mind, subtle body, has to be completely pacified.
That is why sense enjoyment has to be very much regulated.
If without any restriction, we keep on enjoying the senses, the body is agitated.
We all realize, isn't it?
When our senses are hankering for sense enjoyment,
then the body-mind becomes agitated.
Even though I know something is right, I neglect hearing to the voice of our conscience,
and later we repent.
We are not able to have proper control of mind.
So mind becomes very agitated, disturbed,
if we are hankering after the sensual enjoyment.
So that is why restricting the senses is the first aim of spiritualists.
So some people do this restriction by following the path of Gyan, knowledge,
by discussion, by all these things.
They restrain from sensual activities.
Others, they attain the aim by Dhyana, Dhyana Yoga, Ashtanga Yoga practice.
So the senses are able to perceive the sense objects
by some arrangement of air within the body.
There are various kinds of air, this circulation,
neuro-transmission, which we discuss as per modern sciences.
It also happens because of certain airs within the body.
When you have paralysis within the body,
then you are not able to perceive any touch sensation even though you are touching it.
So in a similar fashion, all these airs are responsible for carrying the perception,
sensual perceptions within the body.
So by following the practice of Dhyana Yoga, Ashtanga Yoga,
a person is able to control these airs, regulate the airs within the body,
and thus pacify the senses.
This is another way of controlling the senses.
A person is not even on the platform of Dhyana or Gyan.
He is supposed to follow Karma Yoga.
So he is so much addicted to sense enjoyment,
at least you start donating whatever you are earning out of your hard work.
Don't enjoy all the money for yourself.
Whether you are successful, whether you are failure,
if I fail in any activity, I become disturbed.
If I become successful, again I become disturbed and elation.
But ultimately, my mind becomes agitated. It is not peaceful.
So by offering the results of your activity,
if you don't know spiritual cause, you do not know Krishna,
just use for general welfare, but don't enjoy all for yourself.
By this activity, he will learn how to remain equipoised in success and failure
because anyway, the result I am not going to enjoy.
I am going to dedicate the result.
I am going to do entire thing, give away everything in charity.
In this way, a person is able to follow Karma Yoga,
then he is able to rise to platform of knowledge, Dhyana, Dhyana like that.
But the best way of controlling the senses is as displayed by all the devotees.
The senses are directly engaged in the service of Krishna.
So this is very easy way and most powerful way.
So on the process of Dhyana, you are speculating very, very nicely,
but it is told for the Jnanis and for all the other people,
the Vedas are telling,
So you are thinking you are very Vidwan, you have become very learned,
but please do not sit in a solitary place even with your mother, daughter or sister, it is told.
So why? Because mind can get agitated.
But no, nobody gets agitated by mother, sister and daughter.
No, it gets agitated.
That is why in our country, maximum most of the people,
they have some direct indirect affiliation to Sanatana Dharma.
So they are supposed to be little elevated.
Otherwise, in other religions, there is description.
Do not have physical relationship with mother, sister, aunt and all these 10 or 11 women
because they were having such consciousness that they were doing that.
Even now in some Gulf countries, father is allowed to marry with adopted daughter like that.
So these cultures do exist.
So even though you are following nice culture, everything,
but it is told still a person is supposed to follow this prohibition.
Do not sit in solitary place.
No, I am very learned man in the Vedas.
Even a person who is very, very learned, the senses are so strong,
any time, any moment they can get agitated.
So that is why following this process of Gyan is not very safe path.
And in the second chapter, Lord Krishna also recommends,
A person could be very learned,
but one sense can topple the person's boat immediately.
He can plunge into sinful activities since enjoyment.
Similarly, the Dhyana process, a person is sitting somewhere in the Himalayas,
but they also fail as Vishwamitra Muni failed.
Many other monies, they failed.
But here we see Haridas Thakur, he did not fail at all.
So that is why the process of devotional service is very, very easily
because there is no artificial control of senses.
But your senses are not engaging in sense enjoyment
because they are engaged already in the service of Krishna.
With tongue you are eating the prasadam food which is offered to Krishna.
With eyes you don't have to artificially control.
I will not see any beautiful form.
You are seeing the beautiful form of Krishna.
No, I will not hear any music.
No, you are hearing wonderful music dedicated to Krishna.
So in this way your senses are completely engaged in the service of Krishna.
So a devotee does not endeavor for this artificial means
which are anyway very, very risky.
And most of the time they are prone to failure.
So that is why following the process of a devotee,
Bhakti Yoga is what is recommended in this Bhagavad Gita
that was described in the nutshell also.
Krishna told to Arjuna,
...
a person who is doing bhajan,
who is engaged in my service,
... with great love,
I give the knowledge from the heart.
I destroy all these ignorance, lust, greed from within his heart.
So when God wants to destroy your ignorance,
then who can stop your enlightenment?
So however, it is told even if you want to attain this Brahma Gyan,
you need not follow these other processes.
And simply take to Bhakti Yoga,
not just you will attain Brahma Gyan,
but that's what Haridas Thakur explained in the assembly.
Please don't restrict the chanting of holy name to the giver of liberation.
Liberation is attained simply by the glimpse of the pure name of Krishna.
So what is the meaning of this?
Simply by the glimpse of one chanting of the pure name of Krishna,
it liberates a person completely.
He gets freedom from all the laws of nature.
The past sins don't act upon him.
So there are three stages of chanting.
First stage is called Naam Aparadh stage,
which we all start with.
Naam Aparadh means there are ten offenses against chanting.
I have shared in the previous sessions.
Those devotees who do not know this,
you can contact your Bhakti Vraksha leaders
or contact Shri Shri Prabhu.
So these ten offenses should be avoided.
So when a person is avoiding these ten offenses,
he reaches next stage and that is called Naam Abhas.
What is Abhas?
Abhas means reflexive stage,
offenseless stage,
where just like before the rising of sun,
there is Abhas.
There is an appearance of just light of the sun.
And even that light, night, is very fearful.
A person naturally has the fear of robbers
or animal, snakes or ghosts.
And as soon as there is just this appearance of light of the sun,
sun has not risen yet,
just the appearance of light, Abhas of sun,
it destroys all such fears from the heart.
In a similar fashion,
even though there is,
holy name is not manifest, pure name,
but there is Naam Abhas,
reflection of the holy name,
it completely destroys the fear of material existence from the heart of devotee.
So Prabhupada was once traveling in a flight
with some other devotees.
And it was all going very smooth.
And suddenly the flight hit an air pocket.
And the flight descended hundreds of miles in few seconds.
And everybody was shouting, crying, howling in the flight.
And the disciple was sitting with Prabhupada
and he looked towards Prabhupada,
what is Prabhupada's situation.
And Prabhupada was completely peaceful,
chanting the holy name, Hare Krishna.
So Prabhupada looked towards the disciple, he told,
we are ready to die at any moment.
In a similar fashion,
Prabhupada, when he was there in Calcutta,
so Prabhupada wanted to have a house
and there was a big house which was available
for a very, very cheap price.
And so why this house was so cheap?
Because it was haunted by the ghosts.
So Prabhupada took that house, Prabhupada explains.
And then I was living in the house
and there were ghosts and the things were moving,
the plates would fly.
And the other servants would tell,
not Swamiji, whatever they would call Prabhupada at that time,
that sir, how are you living here?
We have ghosts here
and the objects are flying around the house.
So Prabhupada told, I am ghost-proof.
So same fearlessness,
what Haridas Thakur displayed is displayed by Prabhupada.
If you have such things happening in the house,
that would be the last thing you can think of living at.
You would immediately leave that place,
but your devotee is undisturbed.
So this is called Brahmabhuta stage.
A person is not at all disturbed, not at all fearful.
He is ready to die at any moment.
So Haridas Thakur told,
although this is such an elevated platform,
but it can be attained simply by
dim reflection of the chanting of the holy name of Krishna.
So when we are able to avoid these ten offenses,
when we are not at all disturbed by these material upheavals,
when we are following four regulative principles very nicely,
not having material attachments,
then in such a stage without material attachments,
we can do namabhasa chanting, reflexive chanting.
And simply by doing that chanting,
all the past account of karmas, it is cleared.
And then when a person advances,
he is able to chant when there is no desire in the heart.
We all have so many trishna, hankerings within the heart.
When a person is devoid of all the hankering,
he is completely satisfied.
Such people can chant the pure name of Krishna.
So once if a person gets the pure name of Krishna
and wants to speak of liberation, he gets love of God.
Love of God is much much higher ecstasy.
It is told the greatest pleasure of this world since enjoyment,
when compared to Brahmananda, the pleasure of liberation,
it is just like a drop.
The pleasure of liberation,
this Brahma Sukha, Brahma Bhuta,
it is like an ocean compared to the drop of this material enjoyment.
And when that Brahma Sukha is compared to the love of Krishna,
prema, then that becomes a drop compared to the ocean of love of God.
And that ocean is what is the nature of this ocean.
It keeps on expanding.
So it is this happiness that Krishna is coming here.
He is pleading, he is requesting all the living entities.
This is the request of all the devotees.
This is their mission of life.
They are requesting all the living entities.
Bhakti Vinod Thakur is requesting.
Bhakti Vinod Upadesha.
Ek bar naam rasay matore.
Please try to relish this holy name at least once.
Grahe daco, vane daco.
Whether you are in the house, you are a householder, a family man,
or you are sanyasi, you are living in the jungle,
vana prastha, whatever you are doing, please chant the name of Krishna.
Ek bar naam rasay matore.
Just try to come to this platform of relishing the holy name.
So this is the objective of human form of life, Haridas Thakur explained.
So by chanting, so when Haridas Thakur was explaining like this,
this person Gopal Chakravarti, who was an impersonalist.
So there are two kinds of spiritualists.
Impersonalist and personalist.
Impersonalists, they follow philosophies like Advaitvaad, Nirvisheshvaad, Shunyavad,
and they also have written commentary on the Bhagavad Gita.
And for them, this liberation is the ultimate aim of life.
And because this is ultimate aim of life, they have to take so many austerities,
sometimes many births to attain it.
This Gopal Chakravarti could not believe that,
oh, chanting the holy name of Krishna, dim reflection will give you liberation.
Oh, he's a sentimentalist, sentimental devotee.
Unnecessary he's putting for such artificial glories of chanting of the names.
So he became so angry by this thing, he told that if this is not fact,
that chanting of dim reflection of the holy name of Krishna,
it will liberate you, then you should cut off your nose.
And Haridas Thakur being fixed in his understanding of holy name,
he told, yes, I will cut off my nose if that is not true.
And the people in the assembly, they were devotees,
so they immediately threw Gopal Chakravarti out.
And in next few days, it so happened,
just in next few days, that this person, Gopal Chakravarti,
he got leprosy and his limbs started melting away
and his nose also melted away and fell off from his face.
So then the glories of Haridas Thakur became even more famous,
that he's such a Mahabhagavata, pure devotee,
Krishna could not tolerate offense to Haridas Thakur.
So although Haridas Thakur was very sorry to hear the implications of his activities,
devotees never take offense, but Krishna does not tolerate any offense done to the devotees.
So thus his nose fell off instead of, and the Haridas Thakur became more glorified.
So this Brahmana situation, Brahma Gyan, it is not the ultimate.
That is why a special word is used here by Arjuna.
Krishna is not being addressed as Brahma.
Aham Brahma, ask me, the Vedas are telling that I am Brahma.
You have to realize you are Brahma.
But Krishna is not just Brahma. Krishna is Param Brahma.
So that is why in the Garun Purana, there is a shloka,
do not understand being Brahmana, understanding I am not the body,
this is the ultimate perfection of life,
which Nirvisheshwadi, Advaitvadi, Shunyavadi, or they may think,
not Shunyavadi, Nirvisheshwadi, Advaitvadi, they may think.
So in Garun Purana, it is told,
Brahmana Naam Sahasrebhya Satrayaji Vishishyate.
You can find many, many thousands of Brahmanas.
Among them, it is very difficult to find Satrayaji.
Who is Satrayaji? Who can do Yajnas?
Yajnic Brahmanas are so difficult to find.
Who can just by chanting the mantras ignite fire for the Yajna,
and then they can produce mystically magical things out of Yajna.
They can fulfill all one's desires by doing Yajna.
And now because we do not have such Brahmanas,
people are losing faith in the Vedas,
that who has produced anything by these mantras.
But now also if you travel in our country,
you will find many such evidences.
They are ample, still there in the country.
But that is not the highest.
So after Brahmana, Satrayaji is very difficult.
And Satrayaji Sahasrebhya Sarva Vedanta Paraga.
Among all the Brahmanas, you assemble thousands of such Brahmanas.
First of all, Brahmana is rare in society.
After many births, a person becomes Brahmana who realizes I am not the body.
Then somebody is there who can do Yajnas.
And among such thousands of Satrayajis, it is very difficult to find a person,
Brahmana who is Vedanta Paraga, who is knowing Vedanta.
Brahmanas know the Vedas very nicely.
They are called Dvivedis, who have knowledge of two Vedas,
who have knowledge of three Vedas,
who have read all the Vedas very nicely.
But Vedanta is not easy to understand.
The conclusion of all the Vedic knowledge,
they get stuck with the Vedic knowledge only.
And among all those people who have understood Vedanta also,
Sarva Vedanta Vidkotya Vishnubhaktovishishyate.
Sarva Vedanta Vidkotya among crores of such people,
who have understood Vedanta.
So just see how rare it is to find a devotee of Krishna.
Among many, many people, most of the four lakh types of species,
human species, they are uncivilized.
Among the civilized, one Brahmana is rare.
Among them, Satrayaji is rare.
Among them, Vedanta Paraga is rare.
Among them, crores of people who have realized the Vedanta,
a person who is Vishnubhaktogarun Purana states,
it is very rare, Vishnubhaktovishishyate.
And Vaishnavanam Sahastrabhya,
among thousands of Vaishnavas also, Vishnubhaktas also, if you get,
Ekanti Eko Vishishyate.
It is very difficult to find a Vaishnava,
who has dedicated himself completely in the service of Krishna.
He has no other desire in life.
And it is this platform, which Krishna wants to offer us in Bhagavad Gita,
which Lord Chaitanya, Namacharya, Haridas Thakur,
all the great devotees, wish to offer to us.
This was the platform displayed by the great devotees of our country,
from Amrish Maharaj to Shukdev Goswami,
to recently Narsimheta, Amirabai, Bhaktisdhan Maharaj, Shila Prabhupada,
all the associates of Lord Chaitanya, Prahlad Maharaj.
This is the platform, which they wish to tell,
that this is the highest perfection of human form of life.
Human life should be so trained, that you are able to attain
this highest stage of relishing the holy name of Krishna.
This should be only desire in one's life.
So thus, this Vaishnava realization is the highest as per the Vedas.
So they are telling, Brahmana, you have to rise higher.
So Brahmana only understands, Aham Brahmasmi, I am not the body.
Vaishnava understands, Param Brahma, that we are all spirit souls,
small particles, but the Vedas are telling,
there are two souls in the heart, smaller than the smallest,
bigger than the biggest. Atma and Paramatma,
these two souls, they are sitting in the heart.
It is written in the Vedas.
And then it is also mentioned,
there are two kinds of souls.
There is one soul, which is Nitya, which is eternal.
Another category, they are plural, Nitya Naam,
they are many, many in number.
There is Chetana, there is one category, one soul who is conscious.
There is another category of souls, which are many in number, Chetana Naam.
So what is the difference between these two categories of living entities?
This one category of living entity,
it fulfills the desires of all these unlimited,
another category of living entities.
So this category is called Param Brahma,
and the other plural living entities, they are called Brahma.
So here very clearly Lord Krishna tells,
it defies all the conclusive evidences of Advaitva,
these impersonalists, that I am God,
you are God, everybody is God, you just have to realize.
Krishna realized that he is God, I am not realizing.
This is the unfortunate conclusion by many, many people
who are not able to read Bhagavad Gita properly.
So this improper understanding that I am also God,
you are also God, we have to merge in God,
this was given by Sripashankaracharya in the recent times.
Why? That was for a certain reason,
because Buddhism was there in the country,
and Lord Buddha is Krishna himself for a certain reason,
he discarded the Vedas,
and once the Vedas have been discarded,
again Vedas have to be re-established,
because without reading Vedas,
person cannot attain this ultimate pleasure,
success of life, love of God.
So from understanding of voidness,
what Lord Buddha preached,
to come to personal understanding of God,
people would not have taken it.
So Sripashankaracharya, who is Lord Shiva himself,
he gave such an interpretation of Vedas,
which suited that voidist philosophy,
so that at least people start believing in the Vedas.
Vedas are also explaining your philosophy
with some extra information.
So in this way he had to re-establish the Vedas,
so he gave such a twisted interpretation of the Vedas.
As it is told in the various scriptures,
Lord Shiva is telling to Mother Parvati,
kalau brahmana murthina,
in Kalyuga in the form of brahmana,
mayavadam asashasthram,
I will preach mayavad,
which is wrong interpretation of Vedas,
prachanam bodham ucyate,
it will be Buddhism, but prachanam,
covered form of Buddhism.
But then he told,
this philosophy should not be followed by wise men,
and intelligent men of knowledge,
which fall by hearing this philosophy.
What is the unique feature of this philosophy?
It is mentioned in the Vedas,
that parabrahma, I will equate it with brahm,
I will tell brahm and parabrahma are same,
soul and supersoul,
atma, parmatma is one and the same thing.
But then because he is a devotee,
Vaishnavanam, yatha, shambhu,
Bhagavatam writes in the conclusion,
the end of Bhagavatam, this shloka is mentioned,
Vaishnavanam,
if you want to be a Vaishnava,
you have to follow the footsteps of Lord Shiva,
he is greatest devotee.
So because he was a devotee at heart,
at the end of his preaching tenure,
he explained,
bhaj govindam, bhaj govindam,
govindam bhaj mudamate,
what Lord Krishna is telling here,
in the nutshell verses,
previous to this verse,
bhajatam priti purvakam,
he also told bhaj govindam, bhaj govindam,
just serve govinda, serve govinda,
engage in his seva mudamate,
foolish person,
don't try to make these interpretations
out of Vedas.
Swarjuna is clearly rejecting this principle,
that God is also Brahm,
I am also Brahm,
he is telling Krishna,
you are param brahm,
and param dhama,
your supreme abode,
so we want to elevate ourselves,
we may not be willing,
or desiring to do that,
but those who are having knowledge of Vedas,
they know there are higher planets
having better benefits,
comforts of life,
they want to go to those planets,
but the topmost planet of maximum happiness
is Krishna only,
Krishna only means,
Krishna personally maintains that planet
with his internal energy,
so that is why Krishna is also called supreme abode,
all the living entities,
they rest personally on the energy of Krishna,
so Krishna is param brahm,
and he is param dhama also,
and he is pavitram,
Krishna is completely pure,
that is why,
Krishna has come in the form of his holy name,
simply by contacting the holy name of Krishna,
so Krishna is being addressed here as param pavitram,
so there are various methods of purification,
if you do tapasya,
you purify yourself,
you do charity,
you purify yourself,
purifying means,
throwing rajasthamas out of your heart,
removing lust and greed from the heart,
this is the primary objective of human life,
when we are completely freed of lust and greed,
we will understand I am not the body,
so in order to remove this impurities,
lust and greed,
you have to follow various processes,
charity, yajna, tapasya,
but the best way is contacting the supremely pure person,
so Krishna is addressed here as param pavitram,
the greatest purifier,
so that is why even if you wish to purify yourself,
the process which should be taken is simply,
contacting,
keeping yourself in constant touch with Krishna,
pavitram paramam bhavan,
bhavan means yourself,
purusham shasvatam divyam,
now Krishna is again not telling,
as the impersonalists will tell that Krishna,
actually he has come from some light,
light has taken some form,
so Krishna is telling no,
purusham shasvatam,
you are purush,
purush means you are a person,
you are not some energy,
and what kind of person you are,
you are shasvat,
shasvat means eternal,
there is no birth for you,
and there is no death for you,
you become visible,
and then you become invisible,
you are divyam,
divyam means completely spiritual,
your body is not made up of matter,
so this is the conclusion of Arjuna about Krishna,
that you are supreme spirit,
the source of all other spirits,
and we are ultimately meant to live with you,
you are the ultimate dham,
pavitram paramam,
so you are supreme purifier,
in order to come to sattva guna,
understand oneself,
person should come in contact,
touch with you,
maintain constant touch with you,
and purusham shasvatam divyam,
you are a person,
god is a person,
adi devam ajam vibham,
and there are various devatas,
who control the affairs of the universe,
you are adi dev,
you are the origin of all the devatas,
ajam, again he is mentioning,
first of all you mentioned purusham shasvatam,
you are eternal purush,
and then Arjuna mentions ajam,
ajam means unborn,
you do not take births,
vibham, vibham means you are all attractive,
you are the source of all power,
all pervading beauty,
ahus tvam rishaya sarve,
so somebody can claim,
Arjuna is again sentimentless devotee,
just like Gopal Chakravarti,
he told Haridas Thakur,
so no, no sentiment,
Arjuna is telling,
ahus tvam rishaya sarve,
so the same thing is told about you,
by all the rishis,
like what rishis,
devarshir naradas tatha,
so this bhagavad gita,
all the vedas we have got from
hrishi vedavyas,
and narad muni,
spiritual master of vedavyas also,
so narad muni tells the same thing
about your personality,
that you did not take birth,
you did not die,
you are always existing in a spiritual world,
and human life is meant to elevate
oneself to that position,
where God is living,
and personally engage in loving relationship with God,
so narad tells like this,
asit muni,
deval muni,
all these are great rishi munis of the universe,
vyasah vedavyas,
he also tells the same thing,
swayam chaiva bravishi me,
and what these sages,
different sages speak about you,
same thing,
swayam,
yourself have explained to me very kindly,
so if we want to have knowledge of any subject matter,
we should approach the authorities of that subject,
who dedicate their life to find that,
so all these rishi munis,
their purpose is just to find what is truth of life,
what is God,
they have no other purpose in life,
they don't do any jobs,
no business,
no sense enjoyment,
and they have very long life span of millions of years,
so after having,
so vedavyas appeared 5000 years ago,
and narad muni is his spiritual master,
he came from brahma,
the first person of the universe,
and now also he is giving knowledge,
so very very powerful personalities,
so these personalities who have dedicated their life,
so we should,
so anyway we are laymen,
we have to follow authorities,
just like somebody is telling you take this vaccine,
so we have not done experiments,
but we have to understand these people are,
so I am not pro,
I am not telling to be pro or anti vaccination,
just giving a crude example,
for any malady disease,
if you have to take medicine,
we don't do research,
we approach persons,
find the right person,
who has done research about this subject matter,
who has knowledge about this subject matter,
whose life is dedicated to this end,
so you can follow authority,
either you can be pro vaccine,
or you can be anti vaccine,
like some people are there,
or some people who follow traditional medicine,
they are telling this medicine is bad,
but we cannot follow any fourth thing,
we have to follow either of the authorities,
in a similar fashion to understand
spiritual life perfectly,
we cannot speculate,
we are not able to understand virus
from our speculation,
what to speak of God,
so simply we have to follow the path of
great sages and rishis,
the great authorities,
so all such great authorities
also tell the same thing about Krishna,
and then Arjuna tells,
sarva metha dhritam manye,
whatever knowledge you have spoken to me,
this is confirmed by rishis also,
so I perfectly accept it,
yan mam vadasi keshava,
and accepting your words,
words of great sages,
is the only way of knowing you,
because only you know yourself perfectly,
na deva na dhanava,
the great devatas,
who are controller of these universes,
many many planets of this universe,
or the dhanavas,
their enemies,
they also do not know your personality,
a person can be known only
when you have relationship with him,
so that is why the greatest process,
the most powerful process of knowing God,
is bhakti yoga,
to establish a loving relationship with God,
when you have a relationship with the person,
then the person gives the knowledge,
and that Lord Krishna explains in Bhagavad Gita,
na syami atma bhavasto,
those who are engaged in my service,
so if we want to have knowledge of God,
simply we have to follow Bhagavad Gita,
Krishna tells,
satat yukta naam,
constantly who is engaged in my service,
always chanting my holy name,
I give him the knowledge,
so that is why the Vedas tell,
jnane prayasam udapasena mantha eva,
understand you are limited,
for material field also you follow authorities,
so you can try the same thing for spiritual field,
and there is no doubt about it,
because we see such personalities,
like great acharyas,
like Haridas Thakur,
how they have practically implemented this thing in their life,
and they are getting such unlimited pleasure,
that Yamunacharya is telling,
the greatest pleasure of this material world,
which we have been advertised as,
we talk about it,
sex pleasure,
and we all know that it does not satisfy,
but we think,
oh maybe it is not satisfactory with this person,
or in this situation,
no it is never satisfactory in any situation,
so Yamunacharya is telling,
yavadhi yadavadhi mamachetakrishnapadaravinde,
from the time I am meditating upon the lotus feet of Krishna,
navnavarasa,
I am getting newer pleasures every day,
and when I think of,
nari sangam is smarimane,
this physical enjoyment,
bhaut mukha vikar,
my mouth curls in distaste,
oh how low great pleasure that is,
so because we do not have,
realization of this higher pleasure,
sometimes you can find dogs,
they are eating their own stool,
so because dog is so hungry,
it does not get any food to eat at times,
so it is forced to eat its own stool,
similarly in some concentration camps,
sometimes people were eating their own stool,
or some,
the brothers they were caught in a building,
which collapsed in earthquake,
the survivor drinking each other's urine for so many days,
so normally a person will not do that,
but if you are hungry,
you do not have anything,
you have to satisfy yourself by these lower pleasures,
so thus in the absence of this higher pleasure,
this knowledge of higher pleasure,
we have become so much handcuffed,
very tightly entangled by these never satisfying pleasures,
so thus it is a request of all the devotees,
it is our request,
try this simple process,
endeavor, read very nicely,
keep on hearing very nicely,
and try to come to the platform,
where we can relish this spiritual pleasure,
relish the chanting of the holy names of Krishna,
and then we will realize it is the evidence that it works,
so the Vedas are telling Arjuna has given the same conclusion,
Bhagavad Gita is a great book of authority,
this is the conclusion of Arjuna,
this is the conclusion of all the great sages,
this is the evidence from the life of great sages,
how they surpass all the biological demands also,
why not we try for this thing very very nicely,
and the process is very simple,
control your senses in the association of devotees,
hear the subject matter which Krishna has described in the books,
and hear the names of Krishna,
very simple,
just by hearing hearing hearing,
along with controlling the senses,
we will be able to come to this platform,
this is the conclusion of Arjuna,
so now before we take up any questions,
let us now practically chant this Hare Krishna Maha Mantra,
and after that we will take up questions if any,
so those devotees who are new,
the process of spiritual realization for Kali Yuga is very simple,
we have to chant the names of Krishna,
now which names we have to chant,
it is very simple,
16 names are there,
it is mentioned in Kali Santaran Upanishad,
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna,
Krishna Krishna Hare Hare,
Hare Ram Hare Ram,
Ram Ram Hare Hare,
