buddhir gyanam sammoha kshama satyam damashyamaha
sukham dukham bhavo bhavo bhayam ca bhayam eva ca
ahimsa samta tustis tapo dhanam yasho yasaha
bhavanti bhava bhutanam matta eva prithag vidhaha
So here Krishna is further explaining his opulences.
Because Arjuna is friend and only to intimate people who are very close friends or family members.
Intimate deep revelation about one's personality happens.
So Krishna is telling now because you are such a close friend of mine I will reveal further this
very very confidential more confidential than most confidential knowledge to you the knowledge of my opulences
and because you love me you will feel great joy upon hearing these things.
So anybody who is able to understand Krishna Krishna explained in the previous verse as beginningless
as somebody who is not born who is firmly convinced that Krishna has no beginning
he is the beginning of everything and everybody and he does not take birth he only appears and disappears.
So if a person understands in this way Krishna's position he becomes liberated.
Now Krishna further explains his opulences.
Here Krishna is explaining different qualities which are existing in this world.
Bodhi means intelligence, jnana means knowledge, asam moha means freedom from doubt, delusion and forgiveness.
Satyam truthfulness, shama dama, self control and calmness, sukh, dukh, pleasure and pain, bhavo bhava, birth, death, fear,
fearlessness, non-violence, equanimity, satisfaction, austerity, charity, fame and infamy are created by me alone.
So these qualities are desirable and some of the qualities mentioned here are not desirable.
So here let us first understand little about these qualities as Prabhupada has very beautifully explained in the purport before we move on with the discussion.
So what is intelligence? We all understand intelligence refers to the power of analyzing things in proper perspective.
So different people are different capacity to analyze one who can analyze better very nicely he's supposed to be more intelligent.
So many times devotees they ask because we are following the process of yoga. Yoga means to control mind and senses.
Anybody who has controlled the mind, super soul has already been reached. Krishna has mentioned in Bhagavad Gita.
So how to control these mind and these senses? So the senses are supposed to be controlled by the mind.
Unless mind and senses are in control, there is no question of spiritual advancement. So this very important understanding we should have in our life.
There should be strenuous attempt to control mind and senses. If senses are going anyway, then it's very difficult.
So mind is supposed to control the senses, but mind itself is not under my control. Then how to do it? That is why Krishna tells.
So there is internal hierarchy. The mind has to be controlled by intelligence.
But unfortunately, now the intelligence is also not purified. Not purified means it is contaminated with Rajaguna and Tamaguna.
So what does it mean when the intelligence gets affected by Rajaguna and Tamaguna?
Tamasic intelligence is shown by the animals. When the rabbit is attacked by hunter, rabbit out of fear closes its eyes.
And then it is happily killed by closing the eyes rabbit thing. So the problem is gone.
So this is one way of solving the problem which people adopt today.
So they want to forget the problem either by sleeping or by engaging in some activity, some entertainment.
This they think will make them happy. Life is miserable. So let us close the eyes from the miseries.
So intelligence misguides in this way. Then Rajasic people, they think sense enjoyment will make me happy.
And every day they are very fond of reading newspapers and still they are not able to understand.
Just like recently, the most famous sportsman of our country of all times, he has said that for 12 years he was in continuous anxiety.
And he's called the god of cricket. And people cannot even imagine to attain a fraction of success he has achieved in his life.
He's called God. And the God was in anxiety for 12 years. So this is a great misunderstanding.
We want to become successful, make our children as good as sports person like them, but they are unhappy.
The current captain had so many anxiety attacks and depression phases.
And the God of cricket, he is also expressing now openly that 12 years I suffered from anxiety.
And the day before the match, it doesn't matter how many years he has spent, he was not able to get sleep.
And even now, he tells it is the same thing with me, but I've got used to it.
And the same thing happened with the best celebrity dancer of all times.
He was not able to sleep the previous night. How is he going to perform the next day?
So this is called Rajaguna.
But some things by attaining material opulences, I will become happy, but they don't know these very things become the cause of distress.
Attaining the position, maintaining the position, anxiety, fear, lamentation, these things cause great disturbance to living entity.
But this wonderful suggestion that acting in this fashion will make you happy is the result of intelligence contaminated by mode of passion, Rajaguna.
So in this way, Maya beat the foolish person left and right entire life.
He keeps on struggling and suffering.
So in order to control mind and senses, intelligence has to purify it.
Intelligence has to be brought into Satvaguna or should the Satvaguna.
And so how do we do it? That is done by reading the scriptures.
That is why reading scriptures every day is very, very important.
So deity worship we do using our senses very nicely.
All five senses are engaged. Mind is also engaged, keeping the sequence counting.
And in this way, we worship God.
And as Krishna will mention, we will see towards the end of Bhagavad Gita that a person who reads this great scripture, he worships me by his intelligence.
So whatever capacity we have got, all the capacity, all the energies, they belong to God.
They should be engaged in service of God.
So how intelligence is used to worship Krishna by studying these scriptures.
So when by intelligence we are worshipping, Krishna means intelligence is in contact with Krishna, then intelligence becomes purified.
In this way, we can very easily control the mind and senses.
So that is why regular reading, regular hearing, scrutinizing reading, it is very, very important.
Just like we study subjects in that similar fashion, we have to study all these scriptures very, very nicely.
At least minimum one hour should be spent.
Otherwise, if you have time, read the entire day.
So very nicely, very deeply, Prabhupada tells penetrating study is important.
And if a person is able to understand, he is able to put faith that Krishna is present in Bhagavad Gita being on absolute platform,
then he will directly associate with Krishna by reading Bhagavad Gita.
And his reactions of past sinful activities will not act upon him.
This is the power of reading Bhagavad Gita.
We are suffering because of past reactions.
If a person is very expert in reading Bhagavad Gita in a submissive way, humble way,
understanding it is non-different from Krishna with regularity, with love, he reads Bhagavad Gita in a scrutinizing manner,
then actions of past sinful activities will not act upon him.
So in this way, we have to have the right intelligence.
So this is called right analysis.
So devotees analysis is best, Prabhupada tells.
So the materialists, they are unfortunately very, very unintelligent
because they do not understand somebody has designed everything nicely.
And they're discussing also that this world is a simulation or not after the Matrix movie was released.
And these talks also became more frequent and they don't understand.
Don't ask from where you have picked up the concept.
So they will tell you the crew that they have picked up from Bhagavatam only.
That is why toward the ends of it, they place this track.
I think most of us would not have noticed.
But at the end of the movie, this song is playing when they show the credits.
So they are telling that yes, and most of them are convinced that yes,
this world is mostly simulated.
Mostly we are living in a created reality.
Why? Because they are telling this world has got a design.
Somebody is telling this might be the result of some high school experiment of some other creation.
So because they see design pattern everywhere.
So it is common sense that this world is but they will not put faith in God.
So this world has been created by somebody and that somebody's Brahma that he's also created by somebody.
So this ultimate end where we reach where we do not find anybody beyond that is called God.
So if we engage ourselves in service of God, then automatically because everything is under his control.
If you become dear to God, nothing can disturb you.
This is called the best intelligence.
However, it is possible to come to this fact, understanding faith by regular reading, purifying and intelligence by reading of scriptures.
Then second point is called knowledge.
What is knowledge?
So knowledge means to understand that spirit is different from matter.
So today's knowledge, what we are seeing around us, even the best, the most knowledgeable person are called technologists or like that.
So that technology is not actually knowledge from perspective of less intelligent people.
They can take it as knowledge, just like for some tribal man, a person who is car mechanic, repairman.
He will call him a very great person.
He can make the car move and fix so many things.
Electrician of village is very famous, but electrician is not very intelligent man.
But still, because everybody are less intelligent in their social circle, so they call them.
So there is this very nice story of Lalbhujapkar.
I think some of you would have read it was there in our school syllabus.
So there was a village and in that village, it so happens that an elephant crosses the fields.
And although so many animals people are used to seeing in the villages, but these people never saw an elephant.
So when they saw these huge footsteps, they were not able to understand.
What is this thing?
What are these footprints?
And in that village, there was one most wise person.
His name was Lalbhujapkar.
So Lalbhujapkar means he was Bhujapkar means who is who is going to solve the riddle.
So that was the name given to him, Lalbhujapkar.
So this Lalbhujapkar was very expert.
He was as they tell frog in the well.
Prabhupada very beautifully explains this analogy of the scriptures.
If any time a person gives this argument that I cannot believe, then that is called less intelligence.
You cannot believe because what is your understanding of the world?
You can be just like a frog in the well.
So the example is given and a frog from the ocean.
It fell into the well.
And there was one most intelligent frog in the well.
And he came forward to receive and welcome this new member.
And he asked from where from which well are you coming?
So he told, well, I'm not coming from well.
I'm coming from motion.
The ocean. What is that?
It's a huge will know.
Yeah, it's also a body of water.
It's not a well. It's a body of water.
It is very huge, very deep.
So you told how deep it is, how big it is, four feet.
Well, I'm not still bigger.
Eight feet.
No bigger.
Ten feet bigger.
Twenty feet.
Oh, you are a crazy frog.
He is telling he is not able to imagine because he is a frog of the well.
He has not seen the universe.
He has not seen many great oceans.
So thus, I cannot believe that is not a right argument.
So this law which occurred, he goes and he is very eager to give advices.
And he's analyzing all those footprints very, very nicely.
And after such nice analysis, he tells,
that has understood what nobody could understand.
So what he has understood,
is that hand mill, mechanical mill.
So,
somebody fastened this huge hand mill to the legs of the deer
and the deer jumped across the fields wearing those mills in his legs.
So this is the explanation given by Lal Bhujakkad.
So this is called a frog in the well.
So Lal Bhujakkad has no experience of an elephant.
So he cannot tell, no, there is a creature.
I don't have experience.
These are his footprints.
In a similar fashion, when the scientists or atheistic scientists,
most of the scientists were theists.
This is a wrong perception because people are becoming very, very sinful.
Understanding of God is going away.
Otherwise, I'll share with your document all the great scientists of all times.
Most of them, the noble laureates, everyone, they are great theists and believers.
So they are telling, giving some very, very ridiculous, just like it is ridiculous.
That are here with mechanical mills tied across its legs.
It is jumping through the fields.
This is ridiculous.
How can that happen?
How he'll get, why he will do that?
Who will do that?
Now the deer can jump.
It is impossible possibility.
So they are telling there was a pool of water and then it was struck by a thunderbolt.
And then amoeba came.
Amoeba became very, very complex.
It became fish.
Then fish became hen.
Hen became deer.
Deer became giraffe.
And then monkeys.
And then we have come human beings.
And having these wonderful brains, which are more powerful than supercomputers.
All this is developed, assembled by chance.
Although my computer cannot assemble by chance, but this brain, this computer, this body,
which can fix up anything, any kind of virus attacks, any kind of disease happens,
any kind of cut wound happens, fracture happens, body knows the science how to fix it.
It is such a wonderful machine.
But still, I will tell it has happened by chance.
By chance, it has developed.
So this is called Lal Bhajakad philosophy.
We have not seen elephants.
So you tell some foolishness is happening.
So thus, this is not considered knowledge.
What?
So this is the version of the scriptures.
It is told it is called Shilpunai Purnam.
Shilpunai Purnam means it is only an art.
Art means just like in art, you put some colors, you mix some colors and you see wonderful creation.
In a similar fashion, you mix some few things.
You mix some silicon, you mix few diodes, transistors, NPN junctions and something else.
And then you have radio or you have computer like that.
You are simply mixing the material ingredients, just like an artist is mixing the colors.
It's simply configuring the matter.
A stone is there.
A sculptor can make very nice statue out of it.
You can make very nice robot out of it.
This just understanding reconfiguring the matter that is not supposed to be very intelligent activity.
It can be considered intelligent, just like Lal Bhujakad was considered intelligent in the village.
However, real knowledge is defined in the Vedas as ability to understand soul is different from the body.
And we all understand every night I come in delusion thinking that I am that body, but that is false.
So in this way, when a person is able to understand, I am not the body that is called the platform of knowledge from their knowledge.
That is the beginning of knowledge.
So this is called knowledge and freedom from doubt and delusion.
So many times we are very much perplexed by the doubts.
So as long as we are addicted to material enjoyment, physical or mental, we will not be able to get freedom from doubt and delusion.
And in that state, Krishna tells, a person who always keeps on doubting, Krishna is offering his hand.
Take my advice, come out of this well of so much suffering, birth and death.
And we keep doubting this is fact or not.
Then Krishna tells, a person who is doubtful always, he is destroyed because the right person was offering you help, but you in doubt could not take the help.
So and I personally experienced in my life when I happened to visit Jodhpur city almost a decade ago and we were supposed to start some activities over there.
It was a very new place and it so happened I stumbled across the temple and very nice temple.
If somebody is from Jodhpur, he's hearing Kunj Bihari temple.
It is so I read this in the map.
I was willing to visit that place that how to go there.
So Krishna very nicely reciprocated.
I was wondering it was not very famous temples or maybe the people I stumbled across.
They were not knowing where is the temple.
So I was asking, where is this temple?
I want to see visited, but they were not knowing.
Then we were returning to our place of stay in the auto.
And when we were returning this person, he lost the way or I don't he was not knowing the place where you're staying.
He entered somewhere else and suddenly when he was going, he stops in front of some big building and big old small Haveli kind of building.
And then I thought various brought us.
So I told him, OK, you sit.
I'll ask the address where we how we have to travel.
And then I come out and see what is this nice structure and looks like a temple.
So I asked the people, what is this?
They told this Kunj Bihari temple.
So it was Krishna's mercy.
Such nice arrangement happened.
And when I went out, then so many boys, they were very, very eager that please come.
They were receiving like anything.
Come, we will show you the temple.
So I became very doubtful.
And because many, many tourists, they come there to visit the Jodhpur Fort.
That place is close to it.
So I thought they must be some tour guides or they would be charging money.
First, they will show me.
Then they will force me to give money.
So I was not willing to go.
And then after some time, I realized they were very genuine.
And that whole city, the old city is very, very wonderful city.
It's almost like Vrindavan.
People will receive you very nicely.
So many beautiful temples are there.
But I was doubtful, hesitant to take their help.
But they were genuine.
They were genuine.
Later, I realized it was known that we do not want money.
And then I saw everybody so happy to see Sadhu.
That is a culture they have.
So the conclusion is if we are doubtful, then we will miss this wonderful opportunity of attaining life full of pleasure, eternal life.
So freedom from doubt and delusion here, Krishna is telling that also comes from me.
So if we follow this Krishna consciousness nicely, that is a stage.
All of us are doubtful in the beginning and we cross that stage.
But we have to follow nicely.
Krishna imparts freedom from doubt and all confusions.
Then forgiveness.
It is very, very important to be forgiving.
That is also given by Krishna.
Truthfulness qualities given by Krishna.
Self control.
If you want to do very, very difficult, it is also given by created by Krishna.
Calmness is also created by Krishna.
Just like in a computer game, if you play, you'll find so many objects, so many places, so many scenes.
All those are created.
You can reach that place, accomplish that thing if it is created by the creator of the game.
You can jump only if jump he has designed.
You can laugh if he has designed the laughter.
You can climb over a crate if great has been designed and put over there.
And climbing sense has been given to you in a similar fashion.
We have to understand whatever is happening here.
It has been created by Krishna.
Calmness that we feel it is created created by Krishna.
Pleasure and pain both are created by Krishna.
Birth, death, fear, fearlessness is also created by Krishna.
Nonviolence, equanimity, satisfaction, austerity, charity, fame, infamy.
Everything is created by Krishna.
So why Krishna is mentioning all these things?
So Krishna is mentioning all these things so that we understand everything is created by Krishna alone.
So all the good qualities, bad qualities, everything is completely under control of Krishna.
We are helpless.
So we find various descriptions in the Bhagavatam that this planet is situated in this way.
These are the living entities who live over there.
These are their powers.
And many times we get confused by such descriptions and we want to understand exactly how does it happen.
So all these descriptions explaining the opulences of Krishna.
So ultimately, Bhagavatam is meant for understanding Krishna.
Then why one may wonder that all these different things are mentioned.
And so technically it is mentioned that time is like this atom is like this and so many other thing Bhagavatam describes.
So the purpose of all these things is before describing Krishna, they want to understand who this Krishna is.
Just like if somebody does not know and the president of any country visits, he will not be able to give proper respect, relate with the president.
And thus he will miss an opportunity, the benefit which you could have derived out of meeting the president.
So before meeting, it is explained who is this person who is coming in a similar fashion before explaining about Krishna.
First of all, this material universe is explained by Shukadeva Goswami that how wonderful this universe is.
So in this way, the purpose of and then other incarnations are explained.
And then finally, Krishna is explained at the end, who is the source of all incarnations.
So the purpose of all these descriptions are to make a person very, very humble.
So this humility is very, very important.
As we have seen, this is the first criteria to enter into God consciousness.
So when Srila Prabhupada, he was running a pharmacy before sannyas in his household life, and one of his godbrothers, he approached Srila Prabhupada.
And he asked Srila Prabhupada, Prabhupada gave him some new tonic, which he had made like that.
So Prabhupada, he was very close to Prabhupada.
And he told he was knowing Prabhupada that he's a very, very devotional person.
And in his household life, Prabhupada would, of course, because he's a Nitya Siddha, he was very, very advanced devotee.
So some of the close associates, they were recognizing this ability of Prabhupada.
So he told that, no, not this tonic. I want that tonic, which you are drinking every day.
Prabhupada, so what tonic you are talking about? I'm taking every day.
Yes, I want that tonic, which you are taking every day, the tonic of love of God.
Please give me that tonic.
So Prabhupada explained, no, no, I don't have any such tonic.
But yes, I know the formula.
So this verse is very, very important.
So sometimes we may get confused with so many verses, so many instructions to follow.
So in Chaitanya Charita Amrita, there is a description of the devotee, Haridas Thakur, which we have heard many times, Namacharya.
Haridas Thakur was so advanced in his devotional service that he was chanting three lakh names of Hare Krishna Mahamantra.
So chanting twenty five thousand names, sixteen rounds takes us two hours, around two hours.
So if you have to chant three lakh names, it means it will take twenty four hours for you.
So practically entire day he was having no business but to chant, chant and chant.
And his chanting was so powerful that he was able to convert a prostitute to a similar level of chanting twenty four hours.
Just see, this is the proof, as we discussed in the previous session, the life of the sadhus.
They are the proof of this process.
So can anybody make a prostitute, a devotee that to without any preaching, simply by power of preaching, chanting,
simply by power of chanting, without any preaching, that was done by Haridas Thakur.
He accepted just one disciple in entire life.
And Haridas Thakur was very young at that time, twenty four years old.
And the prostitute wanted to entice Haridas Thakur very nicely.
So in the dead of the night, he was staying in the jungle.
He can enjoy, nobody will bother.
But Haridas Thakur told, yes, I will enjoy with you, but I have taken some vow.
I have to finish certain rounds before I can do other activity.
So please you sit here, then we will enjoy together.
Once I finish my rounds in this way, she kept coming one day, two day, third day.
She herself surrendered and she became devotee.
And then he begged at the feet of Haridas Thakur, please deliver me.
Please help me. What do I do?
Then Haridas Thakur recommended her to give all your wealth in charity to the Brahmanas and then come here,
chant continuously holy names of Krishna in front of Tulsi Maharani and serve the Tulsi very, very nicely.
In this way, you will be able to surrender to Krishna.
So anybody who wants to surrender to Krishna, this process they can follow very nicely,
always chanting the names of Krishna and worshipping Tulsi.
So this was the power of Haridas Thakur.
And then one person challenged Haridas Thakur.
Haridas Thakur was explaining the glories of the holy name in an assembly.
So he talked to an impersonalist.
Impersonalists, their aim in life, Advaitavadis, their aim in life is just to become liberated somehow.
And this liberation, they tell, of course, it is not easy.
It takes many, many lives to come to this platform of liberation.
And that is a fact, Krishna tells.
But by chanting the holy names, just a glimpse of the pure name of Krishna,
offenseless chanting, it immediately liberates a living entity.
So we start with the offensive chanting.
Next level is offenseless, reflexive chanting.
So just a glimpse of this offenseless chanting of the holy name.
The example given is you need not see the sun.
You need not have experience of the pure name of Krishna, Shuddhanam.
By chanting Shuddhanam, we develop love of Godhead.
Everything about spiritual life is revealed just by once chanting Shuddhanam.
Before that, we chant Namabhas.
Namabhas means Abhas, just a reflection of sun.
When the sun is about to rise, we see dim light of the sun.
And just that dim light is able to completely make all the people fearless.
As soon as night sets in, the hearts are filled with fear.
The fear of thieves, rogues, or some snakes, scorpions, some other, or some ghostly species.
All these fears, they enter the heart in the darkness.
But as soon as there is this twilight, all this fear is immediately dissolved.
In a similar fashion, all the ignorance and all the fear is completely dissolved.
And a person becomes liberated from all conditioning by a dim reflection of the holy name.
So when he explained like this, so this person became very angry that here is a sentimental devotee.
Out of sentiment, he is telling just a dim reflection will liberate you.
Liberation is so difficult to attain.
So if this is not true what you are speaking, you should cut off your nose.
And Haridas Thakur told, yes, I'll cut off my nose if this is not fact.
And but other people, they were knowing the glories of Haridas Thakur.
They were devotees and they became very, very angry and they started protesting.
And they told him, you leave the assembly immediately, you ignorant person.
But Haridas Thakur, he did not take any offense.
So there it is very beautifully mentioned in the purport.
Haridas Thakur, he did not take an offense because he was very, very strictly following this foremost order of Vaishnavism.
So Vaishnavism is a culmination of philosophy.
What Krishna has explained in Bhagavad Gita, what a glimpse of this is given in all the religions,
what it is given in detail in Chaitanya Charita Amrita, Shrimad Bhagavatam, everywhere.
So this Vaishnavism has got the highest understanding, the highest revelation of absolute truth.
And there are so many strict instructions to be followed.
However, there is one foremost order which is supposed to be taken as foundation stone for building the palace of our spiritual life on it.
So what is this foremost instruction that we have to follow that Prabhupada explained.
This is what Haridas Thakur is explaining is following very, very strictly.
And Krishnadas Kaviraj Goswami, the author of Chaitanya Charita Amrita, tells this one verse explained by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.
A person should string it and he should wear it constantly around his neck so that he never forgets it.
So this one verse is so important.
It is being explained that you wear it always around your neck by stringing it.
So what is this verse and the same verse Prabhupada told.
So I am not drinking. I do not have that tonic of love of God, but I know the formula.
And then Prabhupada repeated the same verse which Krishnadas Kaviraj Goswami is explaining.
You should wear it constantly around your neck, which Haridas Thakur was following very, very strictly.
And Prabhupada tells this is the formula for attaining love of God.
And this is the verse which is one of the eight verses given by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu in written.
Mahaprabhu gave only eight shlokas. So how important it would be.
And this verse is the formula for attaining love of God, the foremost order of Vaishnavism, the first instruction.
And what is that? So Prabhupada explained to his friend, God-brother.
So this is the formula.
So the formula for attaining love of God, it is first of all.
So the first verse of Shikshashtaka,
The glories of the Holy Name are explained, that it cleanses the heart.
All the difficulty, misconception of life, that I am this body, things belong to me, material happiness is real happiness.
All this happens because of contamination of the heart.
So the heart becomes clean by chanting the Holy Name.
Whatever you are seeing as difficulty will be vanquished simply by chanting the Holy Names.
All the knowledge will be revealed.
We will experience extraordinary coolness of the heart.
And what is the process?
Chanting the names of Krishna. But how to chant?
So these are the few things which we have to follow.
Only by following this thing a person will be able to chant.
And what is that?
First of all learn, we all have to learn how to become more humbler than grass.
As we discussed in the last session also, this thing is very very important.
And thus we see the exhibition of this quality in the life of all advanced devotees.
Humbler than the grass. What is the attitude of grass?
This attitude we should adopt.
If somebody is stomping upon you, trying to create difficulty for you, you give comfort to that person.
So Bhakti Sadan Maharaj coined this in his words.
He explained that we should desire the best benediction or somebody uses the best thing for my worst enemy.
So this is the mood of devotee.
He desires the best thing. Usually we desire the best thing for ourselves.
Or maybe the person we love.
But can we desire the best thing to be attained by our worst enemy?
We will never do that.
Person who is coming to kill me, oh he should become very famous.
He should become very rich. He should always have happiness in his life.
May there be no disease in his life. Can we wish like that? No, we cannot do that.
But a devotee is supposed to do that. We should learn how to do that.
If somebody is trying to create difficulty for us, we should try to comfort that person.
This is called humility.
Definition of humility as Prabhupada mentions here in Bhagavad Gita 13 chapter, verse 8-12.
You will find many qualities being described.
How we can understand that a person is on the platform of knowledge.
So one symptom is humility.
And Prabhupada explains what is humility exactly.
Always walking around with your shoulders down and doing like this is humility.
That could be external display of humility.
But what is real humility?
So Prabhupada very beautifully describes.
Humility means not being anxious of getting the satisfaction of being honored by others.
So when others honor us, others praise us, we derive satisfaction out of it.
And just getting this satisfaction is the ultimate objective of the life of people.
Is it not? We want to attain some success, show that success to others.
And when people see the success, then we become very happy.
But humility is just the other way around.
When a person is not anxious to get the satisfaction of being honored by others.
So when others honor us, we feel greatly satisfied.
So anyway, even if we don't desire this respect from others, just like Prabhupada was so much respected,
devotees are always respected in many, many situations.
So when others respect you, definitely you will feel satisfied.
But a person should not be anxious for this satisfaction.
So if a person is anxious, then he is not humble.
So thus we should all try to apply this thing in our life.
Then we will become humble.
Another place Prabhupada mentions, what is humility?
Humility means when a person is completely convinced that nothing in this world,
not my wealth, not my knowledge or anything around me can protect me.
But Krishna, that is called humility.
Because if so, how these definitions are connected?
If a person is working very hard for some achievements and in this way,
he is thinking by doing this thing, I'll become happy, not by surrendering to Krishna.
Then he's not humble.
Krishna is telling surrender unto me only then you can become happy.
So God is telling us to surrender.
But if the person is anxious of being of getting the satisfaction of being honored by others,
he cannot surrender to God.
And if a person is not surrendering to God, he is very, very impudent.
Where is the question of any humility?
So as long as a person has faith, oh, my money, my hard work, my knowledge, my degree,
or the people around me can make me happy, can protect me, then a person cannot become humble.
So that is why Krishna is explaining all these qualities.
We want all these things in our life, the good things which are mentioned here.
So we have to understand Krishna has created all these good things.
We want to avoid all these bad things which are mentioned here.
Delusion we don't like, doubt we don't like, death, fear we do not like.
We want to avoid infamy we want to avoid.
This is also created by Krishna.
So in this way, a person becomes completely dependent upon Krishna when he understands these glories.
That is why Krishna mentions.
We'll see in the next next to next verse, a person who understands this fact about Krishna.
Next, Krishna mentions after this.
So there are very great sages.
The seven great sages who establish all the culture of knowledge on this planet.
After Kalyuga, again, these saptarishis will descend and they will spread knowledge and restart the Satyoga.
All these seven great sages, the seven great sages and before them, four other great sages,
the sons of Brahma and the Manus, 14 Manus, progenitors of mankind.
We can produce two, three, four, five, ten children.
But these Manus, they are so powerful, they can create progeny like anything.
They are born out of my mind and all creatures in these planets descend from them.
So Krishna is giving telling his opulence here.
So not just all these qualities, but all those people, the creatures, living entities who possess all these qualities.
They are also coming from me only.
Vibhuti means opulence.
He who knows in truth this glory and power of mind engages in unalloyed devotional service.
Of this, there is no doubt.
So all these things are being explained so that a person can completely surrender unto Krishna.
That Krishna is the source of everything, all the personalities.
Krishna is the source of all the good qualities, bad qualities.
He will save me from bad things. He will protect me from good things.
He can create all these things in my person.
So in this way, a person becomes completely dependent upon Krishna.
He does not depend upon his own property, wealth, people or endeavors.
So this is the first step, becoming humble and humbler than the grass.
And then second step is tolerant than the tree.
So in this world, so many disturbances will happen to us.
And if we get disturbed, this person does not behave nicely with me.
We should kill that person. We should harm this person.
Devotee does not think like that.
Devotee understands whatever I am suffering, this suffering is coming because of my karma.
I am getting angry at this person's behavior.
I behaved in a similar fashion or worse in the previous life.
So I should be ready. I should be responsible to accept the punishment for my wrongdoings.
So in a similar fashion, I created difficulty for somebody.
So now he or she simply acting as an instrument.
And even if they are not there in place, nevertheless, this behavior I will face in my life by somebody else.
But I have to bear the result because I behaved in similar fashion with other people.
If I am bereft of property in this life, I would have stolen somebody's money property in previous life.
If I am diseased, I would have committed some offense in previous life to some great personalities.
So any suffering that is happening to us, we should very, very gladly accept and not taking the instrument of suffering as a cause of suffering.
In this way, a person becomes very, very tolerant, not getting disturbed by any wrongdoings committed by the instruments.
Yes, the instrument definitely it will suffer if it is doing wrong to any person.
But by avoiding that person, place, situation, I cannot avoid the suffering.
So I need to tolerate it. This thing, there is no way out of it.
Yes, if I surrender to Krishna, then Krishna can minimize it.
A boulder was supposed to fall on our head many, many times.
Then a small dust particle may come and sit on our head or a small stone can hit our head.
In this way, Krishna can minimize.
So devotee thinks Krishna is minimizing my distress because I am surrendered to Krishna.
Let me not take any offense with anybody and let me desire their best benefit.
So in this way, a person has to be tolerant, tolerant, tolerant like the tree person is snatching the twigs, fruits, but the tree never demands.
Oh, you have you ever give me given me any water?
Why should I give it to you?
No, even though people are constantly giving you harassment, just like the pure devotees, they come, they live amidst people.
They try to spread Krishna consciousness only for their benefit.
And sometimes they are given so much of trouble, mental trouble, physical trouble also, just like we saw in the case of Haridas Thakur.
He was attempted to get framed and arrested by the police.
He was attempted to be beaten to death and so many other problems.
He was beaten actually very, very badly.
And so many pure devotees have suffered.
They take the suffering.
They can live very nicely somewhere in the Himalaya in the jungle, simply serve Krishna nicely.
But they suffer so that others can get benefit.
So this instruction, we should understand that trees always well-wisher tree offers its words to others.
Tree offers its fruits to others, leaves to others.
And if somebody is coming and cutting, not giving any water, it will not mind.
It will give shade.
It will give fruit.
It will give everything for others.
Trees always living for others.
Whatever it produces, it is for others.
This should be one's motto of life.
Devotees should always live for the benefit of others.
Narrow men, petty men, animals, they live for themselves.
Human being, at least, even though he does not understand devotional service, he should live for others.
That is the way of actually getting any happiness also and satisfaction in this life.
And if he's wise, he should surrender to Krishna and do the best welfare for others by bringing them into Krishna consciousness.
So simply dedicating one's life in the service of others.
And already people are doing it.
Just like former captain of the Indian team, he told that I told my wife you are my third priority.
First priority is my country.
Second priority are my parents.
Third priority are you.
So already they are thinking of great cause.
So great men, they always think of great cause apart from the individual personal thing, which even animals are doing.
But a wise man, he can understand what is the greatest cause.
And the greatest cause is Krishna or giving Krishna to others.
So in this way, more tolerant than a tree.
Let others commit unlimited offenses.
I am living just for the benefit of my offenders.
Nityananda Prabhu was thrown upon a stone and blood started coming out of his head.
Nityananda Prabhu is God only, Krishna's incarnation only.
But then he's telling, never mind, blood is coming out.
You please chant the name of Krishna.
So when Bhigu Muni kicked Krishna on the chest, Lord Narayan, he was kicked on the chest.
So Lord Narayan immediately got up and he was asking, I hope you did not get hurt.
People are telling my chest is very hard.
And he started massaging the feet of Bhigu.
So can we expect such a behavior?
This is called humbler than the grass.
So he is God.
He can immediately kill that living entity.
But God understands that what is the actual behavior?
What is Godly behavior?
Somebody is kicking on our chest and can we massage his feet thinking that he might have got hurt by hitting my chest?
So this is called humility.
God presents by his own example, either in the form of Lord Narayan or as Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu.
So when God can do like that, what is the status of living entities like us?
We should be much more humble.
And by kicking me, he's making me realize my actual position.
I'm in material world.
I wanted to become God.
I wanted to compete with God.
Throw him out of his place.
I should be kicked left and right.
So all these punishments, trouble which I'm getting, it is very nice.
I should be given much more punishment.
But, Krishna, let me not forget you.
This is the devotee's only desire.
So Trinadapi suni chena taror api sahishnuna.
Humbler than the grass, more tolerant than the tree.
Amanina mana dena.
Amanina, not expecting any honor from others.
And mana dena, giving all honor to all the other living entities at all times.
Lord Rishabhdev mentions because supreme soul as Paramatma is sitting in all the living entities.
So every living entity is a temple of Krishna.
So one should learn how to offer all respect to all living entities at all times.
In this way, you will be able to offer your you will be offering your respects unto me.
This is a way of respecting God, simply respecting the deity in the temple
and creating trouble by our speeches, by our actions for other devotees or even non devotees.
Then that is not Krishna consciousness.
Krishna consciousness means everyone is part and parcel of Krishna.
And every body is a temple of Krishna.
How much respect we offer to a temple.
So similar respect should be offered to all living entities at all times.
So sometimes if the because you have to maintain social etiquette also.
Parents cannot touch the feet of their children.
That will be embarrassing.
And even Kunti Marani did not offer prayers to the lotus feet of Krishna immediately.
She started offering prayers from the appreciating the navel of Krishna.
Namah Pankajamabhaya, then the garland of Krishna, Pankajamalini.
Because if she starts praising the feet of Krishna, Krishna will feel embarrassed because she's elderly aunt.
She understands and later she comes to that position.
In a similar fashion, in the mind we may not show external respects if the social etiquette doesn't allow.
But in the mind, everybody should think, parents should think I am the servant of my children.
Everybody should think I am servant of all the people around me.
And in the mind immediately we should offer respects.
This is the proper way of once the behavior of a Vaishnava.
Offering all respects, how you offer respect to the temple.
In the mind immediately one should offer respect.
And externally, yes, you may have to behave nicely.
If you see a tiger, if you do Dandava, tiger will eat you.
So even though it is pure living entity, now it is conditioned.
External behavior has to be there as per the body.
But internally, respect should be there for all the living entities at all times.
So when a person is situated in this consciousness, then what can happen?
In such a state of mind, one can chant the holy name of Krishna always.
Otherwise it is not possible.
And unless a person is always able to chant the holy name of Krishna in an offenseless manner, there is no advancement of spiritual life.
So if you are offending others, creating trouble for others,
we are working very hard so that people can praise us, then we are not humble.
And unless we are humble, it is not possible to chant the holy name offenselessly of Krishna.
As it is prayed by the devotees in a very nice Vaishnava song.
And it is not very easy to get the strength.
So I think Bhakti Yuna Thakur has composed this song.
So he is praying to Krishna.
He is praying to spiritual master Krishna, please give me strength.
I should be able to give respect to all the living entities.
Sakal is samman. It is not easy.
So a living entity, ordinary materialist outside, he is working very hard so that others can give me samman.
And here devotees trying to build a consciousness whereby I can give samman.
I can give proper honor to all the living entities.
So he is begging for this potency.
This is a special potency.
Only when it is given by Krishna, a person can actually exhibit this practice in his life.
And only when a person is able to receive this potency by which he is able to offer all living entities,
sakal samman kori bishakati, he gets the shakti, tabeto gaibo harinama sukhe.
Then he can gaibo harinama sukhe.
He can chant the holy name of Krishna in great ecstasy.
Otherwise, you would be wondering why pleasure is not coming in my life.
I am chanting the holy name.
So we should see, am I getting disturbed by behavior of others?
Am I working hard still for material assets to become center of attraction for or am I disturbing others to my behavior?
I am getting disturbed.
I am disturbing others and I am attached to these material things.
So then I'm lacking humility.
I'm lacking tolerance.
So we cannot expect pleasure by chanting the holy name of Krishna.
So this fact, many, many devotees are not able to realize very nicely.
And the thing what is missing in my life, the foremost order is missing.
Then tabeto gaibo harinama sukhe.
Then chanting in ecstasy is possible.
And how to attain this stage, how to attain the Shakti, there is a proper, very scientific, very nice process for it.
This is also not easy to understand.
First of all, this foremost order is not easy to understand.
We miss this thing, which that is why we should read these scriptures very, very scrutinizingly.
Like this, many, many secrets are mentioned in every page of Bhagavad Gita Bhagavatam.
When we are doing savor nicely by Krishna's mercy, Association of Vaishnavas, we are able to realize these things.
So that very important, another very confidential knowledge, how we can develop, receive the Shakti, we will discuss.
Do not miss in the next class.
In the next class, we are going to understand chatushloki Bhagavad Gita.
What is chatushloki Bhagavad Gita?
Just like the 18,000 verses of Shrimad Bhagavatam are expansion of four basic verses which were explained by Krishna to Brahma.
Bhagavatam can be understood just in four verses, but a person has to be intelligent like Brahma to do that.
So for less intelligent people like us, it has been expanded to 18,000 verses.
Just like wise scientists, by reading the equation, he can understand entire science.
Less intelligent children, they need further explanation of that.
So similarly, entire Bhagavad Gita can be understood just in four verses.
And what which are those four verses?
We will understand in the next class along with this secret how to get the Shakti of executing this foremost order of Vaishnavism.
So now we will chant the holy names of Krishna.
And after this, we will take up questions.
So please try to be very, very attentive here.
Each and every word very discreetly understanding.
He's Krishna, only Krishna's incarnation.
So unless I give instruction, please do not stop.
This is very, very important process chanting.
And it is very simple.
Those who are new, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Ram, Hare Ram, Ram Ram, Hare Hare.
Just these 16 words you have to chant and hear.
Initially, one special mantra you can chant after me.
Use your tongue to chant, ears to hear.
Please chant the special mantra.
Jai Shri Krishna Chaitanya
Prabhu Nityananda
Shri Advaita Gadadhara
Shrivasadi Gaur Bhakta Vrinda
