Krishna has explained so far his opulences, that he is the source of all the material elements,
he is the source of all the qualities as we discussed in the previous session
and he is also the source of all those beings which possess all such qualities.
All the various species of life, the entire civilization has come from Prajapatis,
the great progenitors who have extraordinary capacities of producing progenies,
not just of the same species but of many many species.
And Krishna tells all those great progenitors of mankind, Prajapatis,
the Saptarishis and the other four great sages, the sons of Brahma, everybody has come from me.
So here Krishna has made his position very clear.
He is the source of all the manifestations that is seen here in this existence.
And now Krishna is further solidifying his position by expressing a statement
which no other devata or any entity has expressed anywhere in the Vedic literatures.
And what is that?
That is the first verse of the eight chapters of the Chatushloka Gita, the verse number eight.
So Krishna is explaining here.
So, I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds.
Everything emanates from me.
Buddha means the wise.
The wise who know this perfectly engage in my devotional service
and worship me with all their hearts.
So, the purport here is very very important and we will read it very carefully.
Prabhupada is explaining.
A learned scholar who has studied the Vedas perfectly
and has information from authorities like Lord Shatanya
and who knows how to apply these teachings can understand
that Krishna is the origin of everything in both the material and spiritual worlds.
And because he knows this perfectly, he becomes firmly fixed in devotional service of the Supreme Lord.
So, actually every line, every word has got great significance
in the writings of the great Acharyas in the scriptures.
So, very nicely Prabhupada has mentioned
very confidential understanding of executing spiritual life here.
So, Prabhupada is explaining.
A learned scholar, first of all a person has to be a learned scholar.
He has to be expert in Vedas.
Who has studied the Vedas, not any scholar.
So, a learned scholar who has studied the Vedas perfectly
and has information from authorities like Lord Shatanya
and who knows how to apply these teachings.
Now, somebody can ask, how do I understand that this is fact?
Aham sarvasya prabhavo matta sarvam pravartate.
So, this Bhagavad Gita, the most important subject matter of Bhagavad Gita is the science of God.
We know so many sciences.
People dedicate their life just to understand the science of a grass or a leaf
or a fragment of a leaf.
But all such sciences in themselves are not able to satisfy us.
So, if actually you want satisfaction in our life,
Prabhupada told, you rather try to understand the science of God.
If you are able to understand God, then everything will be understood automatically.
But it may not be so easy to understand the science of God.
Who is God? Here Krishna is declaring.
Aham sarvasya prabhavo matta sarvam pravartate.
Everything is clear.
I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds.
The whole world is doing research.
Somebody is thinking Higgs boson.
Somebody is telling this matter is eternal.
Somebody is telling XYZ.
Nobody has idea.
Here, Krishna is giving idea.
I am the source of the material world in which you are living,
which you are perceiving to some degree.
And the spiritual world which you cannot perceive.
Aham sarvasya prabhavo.
Everything emanates from me.
No other Devi or Devata has capacity to declare like this.
Nobody, even the top most Devatas, Lord Brahma, Lord Shiva, they also do not declare.
Aham sarvasya prabhavo matta sarvam pravartate.
Everything emanates from me.
I am the source of all the worlds.
Nobody declares.
Only Krishna has declared this thing.
The wise who know this perfectly engage in my devotional service and worship me with all their hearts.
So how to understand, get convinced about this knowledge of God that Krishna is actually supreme personality of God.
Everything is emanating from him.
So here it is mentioned very nicely.
First of all, first condition is a person should study the Vedas perfectly, not imperfectly, not one portion.
He should study the Vedas perfectly and just by reading the Vedas, he will not understand
and has information from authorities like Lord Chaitanya.
Authorities like Lord Chaitanya means those who come in disciplic succession.
So this is also mentioned in Bhagavad Gita.
Before this knowledge is given to Arjuna, Krishna is explained in the fourth chapter.
Unless we take shelter of Guru parampara, this knowledge cannot be understood.
So because this parampara was not available, Krishna had to repeat this knowledge again to Arjuna.
Without parampara, nobody can understand simply by reading the Vedas.
So all these words, the shlokas which we read in the Vedas, they carry a spiritual potency.
So when a disciple takes initiation, takes deeksha, he is given a second birth.
He becomes dhwija. Just like for birth, father and mother are required for biological birth.
Similarly, for spiritual birth to become dhwija, the Vedas are called the mother
and spiritual master is called the father, just like the body is given by the mother.
But the soul, the energy which activates the body, that comes through the semen of the father.
This is the science. So just mother is not sufficient.
In a similar fashion, mother is required definitely.
So Vedas are required, but all these verses, the words, the explanations, literatures that we read,
these are just the body. They will remain dead unless there is mercy of the spiritual master.
That is why it is told,
If we don't receive mantra in the sampradaya, in the gurushishya parampara,
then whatever mantra we may receive, it remains nishval. Nishval means useless.
Of course, some effect will be there, but the desired effect for which we are chanting mantra, that will not be there.
So one has to take shelter of spiritual master.
So one has to take shelter of spiritual master, just like the father invests virya, potency,
and then when the soul travels in the body of the mother, mother supplies the body, then the birth becomes successful.
So once birth becomes successful, if we take shelter of spiritual master and then read the Vedas, both are important.
So spiritual master, he transfers the potency through these verses.
Under the shelter of spiritual master, following his rules and regulations very nicely, doing his seva nicely,
when we read the Vedas, then these Vedas reveal that spiritual potency.
Otherwise, simply by reading the words, nobody can tap the spiritual potency.
So just to help you understand what is the spiritual potency.
So any subject matter, for example,
you can read any of the words which are written in a subject in which you are not expert,
but you will only be touching the lingual meaning, maybe you can pronounce what is written over here.
But you will not be able to understand the intellectual content which these lines are carrying.
If somebody's a student of medicine, if you give him a book of physics, he can read very nicely.
If somebody knows the English language, he can read very nicely.
But an English professor cannot become expert in physics by reading the physics books very nicely.
The intellectual content is not graspable simply by understanding the language or reading the words.
So crude example I'm giving, just like there is intellectual content behind the verses.
Similarly, when there is a love letter written to the beloved, the beloved by reading those words.
So those who are in relationship, they will enjoy such conversation.
And somebody who is not in a relationship, he will read it and he would wonder what is the pleasure in these words.
He would not be able to enjoy at all.
So without relationship, that emotional content is not accessible.
So this emotional content, intellectual content, the same words are carrying.
But proper qualifications are required to access this content.
In a similar fashion, there is a spiritual content also which these words are carrying.
And a proper qualification is required to come in contact with that spiritual content.
And that qualification is taking shelter of a spiritual master.
Without taking shelter of spiritual master, a person can become very expert in reading the Vedas, but it is not possible.
He will simply remain dabbling on the intellect or maybe mental, some intellectual platform.
He will understand some logics, but spiritual content will be far, far away.
So that is why it is very important, Prabhupada told.
You should read my books penetratingly, very, very deeply in the association of devotees.
So that is why we have very nice program now.
This lockdown has facilitated the Bhakti Vraksha program in which every day more than 150 devotees in small groups, they are discussing online this Bhagavad Gita.
So I request if all of you can participate every day in this activity, it will help you in big deal to make spiritual advancement.
So very careful reading is required.
So first thing is learned scholar who has studied the Vedas perfectly and has information from authorities like Lord Chaitanya who come and display succession and who knows further.
So you have authorities and they are giving you instructions, but then you should know how to apply these teachings.
That is called Vijnan. Theoretical knowledge is called Gyan and practical both are required.
A student of science simply by passing theory, he cannot understand actually science.
He cannot pass science exam. He has to go perform lab experiments also.
These two chemicals you mix salt is produced and so that is not sufficient.
You have to produce salt in the laboratory in a similar fashion.
A person should know I am reading very nicely.
I am reading.
I should chant always the names of Krishna and I should do tapasya.
And I have read offering food to Krishna, eating that a person is freed from all the sins.
But are we applying in our life? So one should have knowledge how to apply these principles in one life.
That is why when we read Bhagavad Gita, it should be read in the RDUA format.
You should read and you should discuss with the devotees.
When you discuss with the devotees, you actually understand that is called you.
And then a part a means application, how I am going to apply and when I am going to apply in my life.
Both are important. Yes, I will apply one day will come one life that I will start doing these practices.
No, when is that going to happen? RDUA you read, you discuss, you understand and you try to apply in your life.
And when a person actually applies this knowledge in his life, then it is mentioned here three things.
Study Vedas in parampara under the shelter of authorities and one should know how to apply these teachings.
So in this practical application, when Bhagavad Gita is implemented in one's activities and thoughts, then it is mentioned here.
One can understand that Krishna is the origin of everything in both the material and spiritual worlds.
So unless these conditions are fulfilled, three conditions, it is not possible to understand that Krishna is the origin of everything in both the material and spiritual worlds.
And because he knows this perfectly, he becomes firmly fixed in devotional service of the Supreme Lord.
He can never be deviated by any amount of nonsensical commentaries by fools.
All Vedic literature agrees that Krishna is the source of Brahma, Shiva and all other demigods.
In the Atharva Veda, it is said,
So some people are telling that where is Krishna's name mentioned in the Vedas?
So yes, it is mentioned in the Vedas, but have you read the Vedas thoroughly?
So here you see in the Atharva Veda. Atharva Veda is the original Veda.
Then from Atharva Veda have come Rig Veda, Sam Veda and Yajur Veda.
So in the Atharva Veda, it is said,
The name Krishna is mentioned, not Vishnu.
It was Krishna who in the beginning instructed Brahma in the Vedic knowledge and who disseminated Vedic knowledge in the past.
So we all know that Brahma when he took birth, if you do not know, it is mentioned in the various Puranas in Bhagavatam.
So Brahma was bewildered that from where I have come into existence, he was sitting on top of a huge lotus.
And then he sees around, it is all dark and he does not know what am I supposed to do? Who am I?
And then proper guidance is given to Krishna, is given to Brahma by Krishna.
So very clearly the name of Krishna is there. But yes, it is a fact.
When we read the Vedas, Krishna's name is less mentioned in the Vedas.
Why is it so? Because Vedas mainly talk about Karmakanda that we have seen Krishna is explaining in the second chapter to Arjuna.
The Vedas only talk about the three modes of nature.
So please rise above the Vedas.
So Vedas are meant to just somehow push the living entities on the path of spiritual life.
They mainly contain Karmakanda portion, means fruitive activities.
If you want some material benefit in life, which activity?
So for material benefit, one person can satisfy the respective demigods depending on his requirement.
So people are mainly interested in enjoying some material results in their life.
So the demigods are mentioned, devatas. Krishna need not be mentioned for material benefit.
However, by undergoing such process, slowly a person comes to Upanishads, then he comes to the Vedanta, then he comes to Puranas, and then he surrenders to Krishna.
Thus this gradual elevation, when a person does, then slowly he'll be able to come to the literatures like Bhagavatam, Bhagavad Gita, which exclusively talk of Krishna.
But in the beginning, Krishna's talk is not required because just like in the school, it starts with play school.
Although school is meant to disengage a child from play and engage him in serious business or studies, but initially you make him study very hard, then he will not come to school.
So make him play in the school so that he likes the school and then gradually you introduce slowly in a playful manner education, then he will pick up the learning.
So that is why the ultimate purpose of all the Vedas we understand in Bhagavad Gita, Krishna very clearly tells,
Vedaishtha sarvair aham eva vediyo, from all the Vedas I am to be known.
So unless somebody understands God, there is no purpose of any Veda.
Unless somebody understands the root cause, the problem will not be solved.
And further it is mentioned,
So it is again told Narayan was the original person.
Again it is said,
So we can very clearly mention, very beautifully entire shloka is mentioned.
Narayanad brahma jayate, from Narayana Brahma has taken birth.
Narayanad prajaprati prajayate, this is all from the Vedas.
Narayanad indro jayate, Narayanad ashtav vasavo jayante, Narayanad eka dasa rudra jayante,
Narayanad vadasha ditya, from Narayan Brahma is born, and from Narayan the patriarchs are also born,
from Narayan Indra is born, from Narayan date Vasus are born, from Narayan 11 Rudras are born, from Narayan 12 Adityas are born.
So all the various categories of detas they have come from Narayan.
It is said in the same Vedas, now again see Krishna's name is mentioned,
and mother's name through mother, so that people don't get confused,
Brahmanyo deviki putraha, the son of deviki Krishna is a supreme personality of Godhead,
deviki putraha it is mentioned here.
Then it is said further,
eko vai Narayan asi na Brahma na ishano napo nagni samavne me dhyao aparthi vi na nakshatrani na surya sa eka ki na ramate tasya dhyananta sthasya yatra chandogai kriyamanashtaka adi sangyaka suti stoma stoma ucyate.
In the beginning of the creation there was only the supreme personality of Godhead Narayan.
Na Brahma na ishano, Lord Shiva is called ishan.
So na Brahma na ishano, no Shiva, napo nagni, there was no fire, no moon, no stars in the sky, no sun.
There was only Krishna who creates and enjoys all.
So very clearly it is mentioned here again, that who was there in the beginning, which personality.
So this is the version of the Vedas also.
In the many Purana it is said that Lord Shiva was born from the highest, the supreme Lord Krishna
and the Vedas say that it is the supreme Lord, the creator of Brahma and Shiva who is to be worshipped.
In the moksha dharma, Krishna also says,
So very important thing. No other devta declares like this.
But Krishna has declared in Bhagavad Gita, in moksha dharma also,
So all these living entities who are created by Krishna, they do not know that they are created by Krishna.
Just like a small child, if he is created and left, he will never come to know who are his parents actually.
So unless the parents reveal that we have produced you in a similar fashion.
So although these great living entities are created by Krishna, Krishna declares,
They are deluded by my illusory energy. So they do not know that I am the source of their creation.
In the Varaha Purana it is also said,
Narayan is the supreme personality of Godhead and from him,
Chaturmukha means Brahma,
So Narayan was there from him, Brahma was born from whom Shiva was born.
So this is the succession in which the birth took place from Narayan to Brahma, from Brahma to Shiva.
And from the Vedic literature,
So here very clearly in the purport,
So this statement is supported in all other Vedic literatures as well.
Then, if a person has understood Bhagavad Gita, what would be his situation when he has understood God?
He will be sitting and meditating upon God or he would be following the process of Gyana or Raj Yoga or XYZ some process.
So here next Krishna mentions,
What is the situation of such a person who understands the time source of everything?
So here also Krishna has mentioned,
Bhajan means to do service to Krishna, loving service.
Then how he is engaged in service of Krishna?
So this word is also very important.
So let us have some light on this also.
So if a person has understood this thing, how he will understand?
Again I repeat the three things.
Read the Vedas thoroughly under the guidance of a spiritual master who comes in Guru Parampara from Krishna
and a person should practically apply these teachings.
Then the person realizes that Krishna is the source of all manifestations.
And when he realizes, then what is the next step?
Obviously when you understand Krishna is controlling everything,
He is called Buddha, one who knows this thing, a very wise man.
Who is not wise?
That Krishna has described previously.
Those who think some energy has taken this form, which we call Krishna and Rama and like that.
Ultimate sources, energy of all these forms.
He is abuddhaya, he is less intelligent.
But one who understands this person having form, he is source of all manifestations.
Who is son of Devaki, who is known as Krishna.
He is source of all the manifestations.
He is actually knower of God.
He is called Buddha.
He is declared intelligent.
And one who thinks energy has taken so many other forms, he is less intelligent person.
So such an intelligent man, bhajante, he engages in the service of Krishna and how he engages himself?
So bhaav means with great attention it is mentioned in the synonyms
and in the translation it is mentioned with all their hearts.
With great feelings he engages in the service of Krishna.
So initially such feelings will not be there.
Just like a person who is diseased, he will not feel like eating.
In a similar fashion, we don't feel like engaging in service of God.
Rather we feel like engaging in service of our senses.
Let me please my senses very nicely and I think that will satisfy me.
But Krishna has declared that also is abuddhaya.
That also is less intelligent.
So when a person somehow engages himself in the service of Krishna
under the guidance of spiritual master, applies these teachings,
slowly his anarthas are removed.
Simply he has to keep on reading, keep on hearing, following the rules and regulations
and then unwanted habits, all the addictions will vanish from his life.
So when a person is not at all addicted to any kind of enjoyment,
he is always equally poised, not disturbed by any of the situations,
material upheavals, anarthanivritti.
In that stage a person gets fixed up in the knowledge of Krishna.
That is called nistha stage.
So unless we are following four regulative principles very nicely,
no meat eating, no intoxication, no gambling, no illicit sex,
there is no question of having stable spiritual platform,
having clarity about spiritual life.
So then comes nistha.
Once a person is freed from all unwanted habits, addictions,
he has great clarity in spiritual life.
And then he can convince others also about spiritual science.
And then after this comes ruchi.
Then he will start getting taste in Krishna consciousness.
So we have to waste.
So we have to wait.
A sick man waits.
He takes the medicines very, very nicely.
So apply all these things very nicely in our life.
And then slowly, once our habits are washed away,
we get strong understanding.
Faith then will come taste.
And when taste comes, taste increases, intensifies.
Then a person becomes very strongly attached to spiritual practices.
Just like now we are attached to material enjoyment.
I cannot live without checking out some videos or on my favorite show
or eating my favorite food item.
In a similar fashion, person will become very, very strongly attached
and addicted to spiritual activities.
And after that, he will start feeling when he's completely purified
in his mind, in his actions,
then he will start feeling emotions for Krishna.
And when emotions are felt by a person,
so this cannot be executed artificially,
neither are we recommending to do it.
A person should be very, very strict in following the rules and regulations
under guidance of spiritual master
by following these rules and regulations.
So all these stages will come and a person reaches the bhava platform.
And it is on this bhava platform that actual revelation of spiritual life begins.
So what are the activities when a person has reached this platform
that he's able to worship Krishna with all the heart?
That is mentioned in the next shloka.
So this word is very important.
So the purpose of all the rules and regulations of the Vedas
is to fix a person's mind on Krishna.
So many people wonder and they ask how to control mind.
So the answer is mind can be controlled only when
a person is always able to see Krishna's form within his heart.
Otherwise, it is not possible.
Mind will always remain disturbed.
The minds of great yogis also become disturbed
as we have seen in the Vedas how great Rishi Munis,
they also got disturbed in their tatasya.
Either they became angry or they became lusty
or some disturbance happened in their lives.
But a person who is a devotee of Krishna,
the external disturbances don't disturb him
because he is thinking of Krishna in great love,
not artificially imagining and then trying to focus
like an Ashtang yogi or other yogis, Gyan yogi would do.
So all the rules and regulations are meant to take a person
to this platform where he is able to always
absorb himself in the thoughts of Krishna.
So we have various troubles in life.
So what is the solution to come out of all these troubles?
So Krishna answers,
Durgaani means difficulty.
This material world is full of difficulties.
How to cross over those difficulties?
Not by advancing in our arts and sciences.
But Krishna is telling,
If you become conscious of me, conscious of my instructions,
conscious of my form, conscious of my name,
then
by my mercy you will cross over all the obstacles.
So no obstacle will be able to create any difficulty in your life.
So thus we have to understand we are following all these rules and regulations
so that we can do this thing which is called Machchitta.
So when a person worships Krishna, this is the natural consequence.
So either the person is doing Deity worship.
If he does Deity worship very regularly with great attention and love,
then automatically the form of Krishna will awaken within the heart.
When we are chanting the Hare Krishna Maha Mantra,
so not just mechanically.
So that is why Prabhupada tells you have to be conscious.
You should have sense that I am chanting Krishna's name.
So Krishna personally is coming on my tongue.
So suppose a great person walks in, we will become very conscious,
we will stand up and we will see how to satisfy that person.
So same person has come in the form of name.
So Krishna personally has come.
So how much conscious we should be, this sense we should develop.
And thus Prabhupada tells just to please that person,
we should be very, very attentive.
And with great love and devotion we should chant.
With great gratitude we should chant.
So in this fashion understanding Krishna is present.
And in a prayerful mood, Prabhupada expresses various feelings
in which a person should chant the Hare Krishna Maha Mantra like a child.
So chanting Hare Krishna is genuine cry of a child who cries for his mother.
So we are crying for Krishna's help that Krishna I have got stuck in this material world.
Please deliver me from this material world.
So this is one mood, genuine cry of a child.
And then Prabhupada mentions a person should be very, very attentive.
And then Prabhupada mentions,
Roop Goswami mentions in the Upadesha Amrita
that a person should be very, very respectful because Krishna is a great personality.
So with respect we should chant each and every name.
And then Prabhupada tells with great love and devotion you should chant.
So in this way when we are chanting the name of Krishna,
then the form of Krishna will automatically be revealed by Krishna.
And we should hear.
In this way we have to chant with great awe and reverence, respect, devotion, love.
And we should hear each and every syllable very, very nicely.
In this way when we do bhajante mam, chant the names of Krishna, worship his deity,
or read Bhagavad Gita with this understanding that words of Krishna and Krishna, they are non-different.
So when I am reading Bhagavad Gita, Krishna is personally speaking in the knowledge to me.
This is actual fact.
So with this understanding when I am reading Bhagavad Gita,
worshipping Krishna by my intelligence,
or I am chanting the names of Krishna, worshipping Krishna by my tongue and ears,
or I am engaged in any other form of service of Krishna,
but with this bhava samanvita, then automatically the form of Krishna will awaken within the heart.
And matgata prana.
So a person is always thinking of Krishna and just he is thinking of Krishna,
he has got so much energy within himself,
so here it is told that energy, that prana should be engaged also in the service of Krishna.
Matgata prana. Life should be devoted to the service of Krishna.
So now we have devoted our life for my satisfaction.
I join some company and do some seva, not because I am intended,
I have ever intended to please my boss.
My intention is only to please myself.
As long as my boss or my company satisfies me, I will satisfy the company.
Ultimate intention is my satisfaction.
I enter into a family so that I am pleased.
As soon as my pleasure is disturbed, there is divorce.
Now we will not live together.
Because it is my all activities, my prana is dedicated for my personal satisfaction
and thus we remain dissatisfied.
Because Krishna is our root.
Water should be given to root.
So matgata prana.
So life should be devoted to the service of Krishna.
So these two things are very important.
Both things should be done.
Person should constantly be thinking of Krishna.
Matchitta.
And then person should engage his life, his energy in the service of Krishna.
Surrender himself.
So when he surrender to Krishna, thinking of Krishna,
then what is to be done?
Bodhayanta parasparam.
Bodhayanta means preaching.
Bodhayanta means enlightening in knowledge.
So the devotees discuss about Krishna.
They enlighten each other in understanding of Krishna parasparam.
So discussion about Krishna is very, very important.
So that is why in many places you will find that the actual understanding of Vedas are revealed
when it is discussed among the devotees very nicely.
So thus reading Bhagavad Gita and discussing Bhagavad Gita is very, very important.
Bodhayanta parasparam.
Mutual discussion is required.
Kathayantashchamam nityam.
So they preach each other.
They enlighten each other.
They always talk about me.
Nityam.
Always they are talking about Krishna.
They are not interested in any other affairs.
Tushyanticha ramanthicha.
And they take great pleasure.
Because we have understood why they are deriving great pleasure.
Because all the unwanted habits drives addictions.
They are washed away from the life.
So a person cannot remain absorbed in material enjoyment.
And he can expect spiritual enjoyment also.
When a person is thoroughly convinced that there is no pleasure,
this temporary material satisfaction,
it puts me through so much toil and labor.
And the result is also anxiety and lamentation.
So let me now completely dedicate my life for spiritual pleasure.
Then he can experience spiritual pleasure.
So thus these devotees are able to enjoy the talks of Krishna very, very nicely.
This is the result of understanding who is God.
And then what happens?
Very important thing.
It is mentioned.
Those who are constantly devoted and worship me with love.
I give the understanding by which they can come to me.
So once the devotees were trying to simulate certain situations
in which they encounter various strangers.
And they encourage them to take a Bhagavad Gita
and thus start their Krishna consciousness.
So that is why you will find many, many devotees of the Hare Krishna movement
distributing the literature of Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavad Amadar books to everybody.
Because people are suffering only because of ignorance of this knowledge.
So this world is temporary.
This is not known to people.
They are not the bodies.
They are not able to know it.
Even though some theoretical understanding because anybody is born,
he is in touch with any of the bona fide religion.
All the religions tell you are not the body.
Some understanding is there.
But actual scientific understanding is not there.
So when he gets this understanding,
why am I not the body?
This is just a drama.
So somebody is doing the drama of a friend, of a relative or of an enemy.
So I should not get disturbed if somebody is my enemy.
I should not get very much pleased.
Oh, he's acting as my friend.
It is just a drama.
Ultimately, it is on one family.
We are all children of God.
So it is not that only few people are my family.
Rest are not my family.
I am neutral to them.
I am friends to them.
I am having some enmity against some other people.
So a liberated, wise personality does not discriminate like this.
This is done on platform of ignorance that we discriminate.
This is friend.
This is enemy.
So devotee sees everybody as one family.
Everybody is unsure of God.
We are all one family related to each other.
But these differences happen because of these bodies.
So all the affairs are not supposed to be taken very seriously.
Just a drama.
It is going on.
No activity has got any significance here.
But this entire drama is set up so that we can solve all the problems of life by developing our forgotten relationship with God.
So to understand the science of God, it is very, very difficult.
We are not able to understand one virus.
Can you imagine the smallest they tell semi living or dead living entity or entity?
They don't call it living also.
So that smallest entity, we are not able to understand.
What is it?
We are not able to understand about atoms or molecules.
We are not able to understand about this universe or the planets.
We are not able to explore the next planet.
And how is it possible to understand who has created this wonderful mechanism and system?
So our brains are useless.
Just like a dog's brain cannot understand calculus or trigonometry or even any of the basic knowledge that humans have.
Dog's brain is insufficient.
That is how our brain is also insufficient.
So there is no question of understanding even this world, this universe or our planet or a small virus perfectly using our brain.
So where is the question of understanding God?
So how to understand God?
It is mentioned here.
So that these devotees were very, very enthusiastic as this knowledge should reach many, many people.
And they were developing some place, some simulations.
In this situation, if a person talks like this, he's on such a background.
In this way, you should convince him to take a book in another situation.
In this way, you should convince him to take a book.
So then they told Prabhupada, can we make a record and distribute it to all the devotees so that they can watch and get educated how to distribute our books to the people in general?
So Prabhupada watched it.
And then Prabhupada told, no, it is too artificial.
Don't teach them like this.
But if you can teach them somehow how to become sincere, then the teacher is sitting in the heart.
From heart, he will guide what to speak first and next, because preaching is a very spontaneous activity.
So here Krishna is mentioning, as we will see in the next shloka, that I am seated in the heart.
So I am situated in the heart, just like a small bird from the heart gets the knowledge that you should go and sit on the eggs, hatch the eggs.
Who gives the bird a clue that it has to sit on the eggs?
Not everybody sitting on the eggs.
And then who gives bird the clue how to make the nest? Who gives clue to the spider, how to make its web?
Who is giving all these clues to all the living entities?
Paramatma seated within the heart.
So Paramatma seated within the heart, he can guide the living entity how to approach Krishna.
But what is the qualification required?
Who can approach? God qualification is mentioned here.
Not any greatest yogi who seated himself very firmly on Himalayas.
Not a Jnani who is very scholarly in the Vedas, but those who are bhaktas engaged in the service of Krishna.
Those who are constantly devoted, always devoted to Krishna and worship me with love.
Bhajatam pritipurvakam, not formal worship.
Bhajatam pritipurvakam, with great love those who are worshipping Krishna.
I give the understanding by which they can come to me.
So the same understanding is given in the Vedas also.
But even though you can read the purport, Prabhupada is explaining, a person has taken shelter of spiritual master,
but somehow is not very intelligent, he cannot understand the Vedas.
Then can he not make spiritual advancement? No.
Then Krishna is seated in the heart.
If a person is simply sincere, then Krishna from the heart will guide a person how to make advancement in the life.
So a person should simply make sure he is constantly engaged in the service of God.
Bhajatam pritipurvakam, but with love he should engage in Krishna's service.
This is the way of understanding what is the path in which I should move for spiritual advancement.
So Krishna tells in the final verse of the Chatushlokhi,
Tesham eva anukampartham aham agnana jamta maha, nashayami atmubhavastu, gyanadipena bhasvata.
Out of compassion for them, now this verse is very important.
Out of anukampa, compassion for them,
eye dwelling in their hearts, destroy with the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.
So if anybody is not able to understand what is God,
he is not able to understand what is the right path I am supposed to follow,
then we should simply understand if there is any suffering in our life,
then Krishna is not, we are not able to please Krishna sufficiently.
Otherwise, Krishna is willing to give all the directions to us from the heart.
We should simply learn how to become obedient to Krishna, how to take his instructions.
So thus if there is any problem in life, this is the solution Krishna is telling.
Mat chitta sarva durugani, mat prasada tarishyasi, simply become conscious of me
and all the obstacles, all the problems of life will be solved.
So the difficulty why we are having problems in life and why we are suffering is
because we have made the aim of life to solve my problems of life and to satisfy myself.
This is a wrong approach.
The approach should be how can I solve the problems of Krishna's life,
how I can satisfy Krishna.
This should be the right approach.
When we are working very hard to solve Krishna's problem,
when we are working very hard always for the satisfaction of Krishna,
now Krishna is there seated in our hearts.
He can give us any direction, whatever he wants.
Oh, Krishna is also having any problem. Krishna is God.
Yes, Krishna is having one problem, only one problem.
What is that? He has given freedom to us, all his children,
and we are misusing our independence.
We are using our independence wrongly, not understanding the science
which means that we are having a relationship with God just like the finger is having with the body,
just like a leaf is having with the tree.
Only when the water is offered to the root, the leaf can maintain itself very nicely.
In a similar fashion, only when we engage ourselves in the loving service of Krishna,
we can be actually happy in life.
This knowledge is not known to living entities.
Thus they keep on suffering in this world.
So we can see also from our life,
if you have any devotees around you who work very hard
just to help spread this knowledge on Krishna's behalf,
you see they are always jolly and happy.
They have no problems in life.
But as long as our life is not dedicated,
every morning we get up thinking how I can satisfy myself today,
how we can solve my problems of life.
I am working for myself.
Then rest assured, we will always remain in problematic situation.
It is not going to be solved.
The day we start bothering,
oh, today how can I satisfy Krishna?
Tomorrow, after one year, how should I act that Krishna should be more satisfied?
In this way, satisfaction of Krishna becomes the aim of our life.
Then you see such a person has no problem in our life.
So Krishna is called Govinda.
Govinda means the source of all the pleasure of the senses.
So if I am not having pleasure in the life because there is some disconnect with the source,
source is there in my heart.
So any problem is there because I am disconnected with the source of all pleasures
who is there in the heart.
So just these four verses we have to understand, that's it.
Become conscious of Krishna and engage in the service of Krishna.
When we are engaging ourselves in the loving service of Krishna,
Krishna gives all the directions.
And there is no need of bothering about material necessities also.
In this way, when a person is Krishna conscious,
all the material necessities are also automatically arranged by Krishna.
So thus it is Krishna's request.
Simply become conscious of him, conscious of his instructions.
Simply enough planning how to satisfy myself every day.
Now plan how to satisfy Krishna.
And then you see you will always remain satisfied in your life.
So this is a gist of entire Bhagavad Gita.
So with this we will end today's session.
And now we will be chanting this Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
This Hare Krishna Maha Mantra is the preliminary requirement
to come to this platform of understanding God.
So simply by always chanting the Hare Krishna Maha Mantra,
that is very easy way of becoming Krishna conscious.
So please always chant the names of Krishna,
read the instructions of Krishna,
just read over and over again all these four verses very very nicely.
Entire thing that we have read or what we are going to read in Bhagavad Gita
is further explanation of the science and application of these four verses what we have today.
So now I have shared the link also.
That is the link of our telegram channel.
So all the devotees who are new.
So various useful information, downloads,
and further communication of future sessions are done on the telegram channel.
So if you wish to keep in touch, I request you can join this channel.
And now we will be chanting this Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
Okay, somebody has asked can I get the recording of today?
Yes, you can get the recording.
So on this telegram channel, please search podcast Podbean.
So we upload all our podcasts and the links you will find in the telegram channel.
So by next week, this recording would be uploaded early morning, five o'clock.
So now we'll be chanting this Hare Krishna Mantra post that we will take up questions.
So now let us chant together.
And how do we have to chant?
As we discussed with knowledge and with great attention and with devotion.
Each and every word should be heard very clearly.
16 words are there.
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare,
Hare Ram, Hare Ram, Ram Ram, Hare Hare.
