The Supreme Lord said, My dear friend, mighty-armed Arjuna, listen again to my supreme word, which I shall impart to you for your benefit and which will give you great joy.
Nam evido surgana prabhavam namaharshayaha, aham adir hideva namaharshinam chasarvasaha.
Neither the hosts of demigods nor the great sages know my origin, for in every respect I am the source of the demigods and sages.
Yo mamajam anadim ca vetti lokamaheshwaram asammudha samartheshu sarvapapaya pramuchyate.
He who knows me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the supreme lord of all the worlds, he undiluted men, is freed from all sins.
So Srila Prabhupada explains here. The word paramam is explained thus by Parashar Muni. Who is Parashar Muni? He is father of Vyasade, Ved Vyas.
So some people tell that it is some imagination and there is no history. It is all mythology. But it's not mythology. We have perfect race.
There are Krishna, Krishna's generations, temples, deities lived by them. We have all the evidence.
And we have the great sage who has given us all the Vedas. His father, his father's father's name. In this way complete genealogy has been preserved.
So Parashar Muni is another very great sage who gave birth to Maharishi Ved Vyas. So Parashar Muni has given the definition of Bhagawan. What is God?
So here because the first word used is Sri Bhagawan Uvaca. As we have discussed, entire Bhagavad Gita, Srila Vyasadeva has addressed Krishna by this address, Sri Bhagawan Uvaca.
So what is the meaning of Bhagawan? Bhag means opulence. Van means one who possesses.
One who is possessing all opulence. So this very word Bhagawan, it simply clears away all the impersonal understanding.
So there is a very great plague, spiritual plague, which is affecting so many people now in current times.
And this is called disease of impersonalism. We do not want to accept that there is a person who is God.
Ultimate issue is simply an energy, one jyoti, and that energy takes various forms.
But here Ved Vyas is not agreeing to that. He's telling no, God is not energy. God is called Bhagawan. So one should ask why this name is given to God?
This name is given because he possesses just like Balvaan possesses Bal, Dhanvaan possesses Dhan, Bhagawan possesses Bhag.
Bhag means opulence. Opulence means something which attracts you. These are the personal traits.
wealth, beauty, strength, fame, knowledge, renunciation. These are six things which make a person very attractive.
If he is very strong, either he's having some muscular power or otherwise, if anybody's powerfully attracts people,
if somebody is very good looking, then he or she also attract other people in a similar fashion.
If somebody is very wise, people go forward. They look forward to hearing them.
And if a person is very greatly renounced sadhu, so they are also very attractive. Renunciation is very, very attractive.
And this opulence attracts even the very wealthy people, the kings also.
They were living in great opulence, but renunciation was very attractive for them. Thus they left everything, renounced everything.
So a person who has all these opulences in full, he is called Bhagawan.
So energy cannot be beautiful. Energy, there is no question of being wise.
There is no question of being renounced. There is no question of having any opulence.
Energy is dead. Only a person can possess all these things. So thus, God's supreme personality is a person.
So this knowledge, entire Bhagavad Gita ultimately is to, some people ask, why God is asking all these things.
So here Krishna is clarifying his intention in speaking Bhagavad Gita.
I am speaking this knowledge only for your benefit. So it is not that for Krishna, Krishna is completely full.
But because we are suffering, so to give us relief, Krishna is giving us this knowledge.
And what is the knowledge in this chapter? It is called, Krishna is telling here,
bhūya eva mā bhūya means again, bhūya eva mahābhāho maityaṁ darjuna.
Again here, māy paramam bachā, the topmost knowledge.
So previous chapter already mentioned the most confidential knowledge.
Now what is left after that? So Prabhupāda mentions the knowledge of this chapter, 10th chapter,
is even more confidential than the most confidential knowledge.
So this is spiritual life. There is no limit to most.
Person is most beautiful and then more beautiful than most beautiful.
So that is why sometimes people ask, that how is it possible that spiritual life is always full of happiness?
So if you have to experience happiness, then you have to experience distress also.
Unless you have suffered from the tension of exams, you cannot enjoy vacations.
Unless you have been poor, you cannot enjoy wealth.
Unless you have been diseased, you cannot enjoy fitness and vice versa.
So this is called material world, the world of duality.
So here happiness, distress is nothing. They are the same thing.
Two sides of the same coin.
If somebody is not experiencing happiness here, he cannot experience distress.
So that is why the dog has always been born in such circumstances.
So dog is not much disturbed. He does not take great anxiety.
How will I solve my problems of life? He is used to it.
But if we start living like dog, we'll be greatly discomforted.
So if we have happiness, we are living in a very good place, big place.
Now somebody tells us to go and live in a small place, we'll feel so much of discomfort.
But if always we have been living in a small place, we might not find it uncomfortable.
So this is called material world duality.
Happiness you experience and absence of that so-called happiness is taken as distress.
And absence of that distressing situation is taken as happiness.
Ultimately, it is the same thing.
So in material world, one cannot be experienced without the other.
Happiness exists only because there is existence of distress.
And distress exists only because there is existence of so-called happiness.
But so people cannot understand how there is something called always happiness.
If I am static at some level, I am not happy. I want to increase it.
So that is the nature.
Spiritual happiness is as we were hearing this song.
At every step, the pleasure keeps on increasing.
This is spiritual life. So it is so nice.
So thus a person always remains happy. It is not static.
So this is the first condition of relishing Bhagavad Gita, Prabhupada mentions.
So whether it be Hare Krishna Mahamantra,
whether it be reading of Bhagavad Gita, hearing of this message,
if any person hears with rapt attention,
then such a message will never appear hackneyed or boring to that person.
But if a person is not able to put this rapt attention,
then he will get bored very soon with the subject matter.
So this is the first most important thing that a person should be very, very attentive.
So with rapt attention, if a person hears Hare Krishna Mahamantra,
if he hears Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavatam,
so sometimes we assume it will take a very long time.
Now we are at every new level.
After a very long time, we will be able to relish Bhagavad Gita,
we will be able to enjoy Bhagavatam, we will be able to do this.
But if we are able to somehow be very raptly attentive,
then we can relish this subject matter.
It will never appear stale for us.
So whether we are doing deity worship,
so Prabhupada tells the example,
so Krishna is absolute and Krishna's service is also absolute.
So when Srila Prabhupada was coming out of some temple
and all the devotees were accompanying Prabhupada,
and it is the etiquette that whenever you see spiritual master,
immediately you should fall and offer him respects.
Spiritual master should be respected like supreme personality of Godhead.
Spiritual master should be accepted as non-different from me.
If God comes, immediately we will fall.
So as many times a person sees spiritual master,
suppose five times in a day you are seeing spiritual master crossing you,
five times we have to offer respects.
And if the spiritual master is at distance,
it is told as soon as you see him, you offer respect.
And when he comes closer to you, he sees you, then again you offer respect.
In this way, the disciple gets trained how to respect the supreme personality of Godhead.
So spiritual master is supposed to be offered such great respect.
So when he came out, somehow this disciple,
he could not pay attention that Prabhupada has come out
and he was very much absorbed in gardening.
So Prabhupada became very happy.
Just see, this is how devotional service should be done.
So when you are worshipping the deity in the temple,
deity is Arcavatar, Krishna personally has come in that form.
And it may be deity worship or it could be cleaning the floor
or it could be gardening or any other seva of Krishna.
Every seva should be done with rapt attention because Krishna is absolute.
So all the services are also absolute.
It is not that a person is worshipping Krishna in the altar.
He is very exalted and the person who is cleaning the floor,
who is driving the vehicle or who is doing any other seva for Krishna,
he is less important. No.
In the service of Krishna, everybody, all the services are equally important
provided a person does that seva with that realization.
So Prabhupada told, this is the mood while doing any seva.
Any seva when it is given to you, we should think
that Krishna personally has given me this seva.
Now we are not on spiritual platform that we can see Krishna, hear Krishna.
So this instruction comes in parampara.
So any seva which we have been assigned through the spiritual master,
we should understand that Krishna personally has given me with this seva.
So we should be very, very enthusiastic and very, very attentive in doing that task.
And then a person can experience great pleasure in hearing Bhagavad Gita.
So Krishna has told that I am speaking to you most confidential knowledge.
Now, as we discussed, spiritual knowledge, spiritual pleasure always keeps on expanding.
So this knowledge is further more confidential. Why?
Because now in this chapter, Krishna is going to reveal more of his opulence.
Earlier Krishna explained knowledge of his energy, some basic principles.
And now Krishna will reveal further his opulence, how he actually controls the nature,
how everything in the manifestation it belongs to him.
So these things can be appreciated only by the person who has followed
the instructions of nine chapters.
Person who is always thinking of Krishna, how he is thinking of Krishna?
Not like Kansa. Kansa was envious. He was always thinking,
how should I kill Krishna? Or in fear, Krishna will kill me.
So this is also thinking of Krishna. So that is where Krishna tells,
bhava mad bhakto, become my devotee.
So we should think of Krishna and we should become devotee of Krishna.
In favorable way by rendering service, we have to think of Krishna.
Madhyaji, offer your respects unto me. Worship me, Madhyaji.
Mam namaskuru, offer your respects unto me.
So this is the most secret instruction. If a person follows this instruction,
then he can attain very great bliss. He can solve all the problems of life.
So when a person is following this thing, he has become devotee of Krishna.
Now only a devotee can appreciate the opulence and derive benefit, joy out of it.
Just like, you know, the parents may be praising the child at times,
when they meet each other, people discuss.
And the other person may get sometimes bored or they are talking so much highly of their children.
We are not taking much interest. Why? Because we don't have relationship with their children.
But they are feeling great pleasure when they hear about their children glories,
they become very pleased. And when they repeat those glories again, they get pleasure.
In a similar fashion, this entire Bhagavad Gita is about the glorification of Krishna.
So if a person is able to develop relationship with Krishna,
then a person will be able to, Prabhupada tells, enjoy Bhagavad Gita.
And how the relationship develops? So we all have a relationship with Krishna.
So God is a person and we have a permanent relationship with God.
That is being forgotten when we have taken this body.
So the entire sum and substance of spiritual life is to get mukti, freedom.
What is this mukti, freedom?
It does not mean simply stopping birth and death and merging in some light.
The definition of mukti is given.
Mukti or liberation, which is described in the Vedas as the aim of life.
That means,
means other forms which we have taken, our forms we keep on changing.
We were small boy or girl, now we are young or old, in this way our forms are changing.
And after this body, another form.
So,
giving up these designations, which we have got,
means we have got, rupa means form, swa means our own form.
This is not my form.
This is the form of the dresser machine that we have got.
Being established in my own form without taking any external body.
Just see Shastras make everything very very clear.
Where is it mentioned that you have to go and mix in some Brahma Jyoti or somewhere else?
That is not real mukti.
So mukti means
established in your own form.
In our original form, we have a unique relationship with Krishna.
So the relationships are of various categories that we see in the material world.
The relationship begins with Shantaras.
Shantaras means there is appreciation of Krishna.
Just like
the fans are there of any great personality.
So they have great appreciation simply by seeing their
what do we call that celebrity, they become full of joy
and they become greatly pleased just by hearing about them, just by seeing them.
So this is called appreciation relationship.
He may not be knowing him personally.
They don't know much about him, but there is appreciation, great appreciation.
So this is called Shantaras.
So when we come to the temple, we see the deities
and we get great pleasure by seeing the form.
Devotees come in ecstasy.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, when he went to Jagannath Puri temple
and he was going along with his associates
and
there was some transcendental misunderstanding that Chaitanya Mahaprabhu started walking alone
very fast towards the temple.
And when he reached Jagannath temple, because Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is Krishna himself, supremely pure.
And when he saw Jagannath, he did not see any wooden deities over there.
We may see wood from our eyes, but it is not wood.
So this is the science of deities.
So when Krishna is present
Krishna expands himself in various expansions, various incarnations.
And when Krishna comes here, he comes with all those incarnations.
When Krishna is here, Lord Ramachandra is present.
Varahadeva is present. Matsya avatar is present.
Kachapa avatar is present. Kapila avatar is present.
All the avatars are present in the body of Krishna simultaneously.
Narasimha avatar is present.
This is called Krishna's opulence.
So when in Vrindavan also,
there are some demons like Kaliya, snake, mozer, others were there.
So it is not that Krishna was fighting with them.
Vasudev is also present along with Krishna when he comes here.
So that Vasudev form fights with the demons and does all these things.
So all these other tasks, Krishna has delegated for the other expansions.
Krishna's task is simply singing, dancing, eating lunch prasadam and enjoying with his friends.
So Prabhupada would tell that I want to go back to Godhead so that I can eat kachori with Krishna.
So this is the task of Krishna. This is spiritual life, complete enjoyment.
But when Krishna comes here, he comes with all the expansions.
And as per the relationship, devotees are able to appreciate those forms within Krishna.
So when the Arsha avatar comes here, when the deity incarnation is there,
so again, Krishna is present in all those forms.
Also, Krishna is having a form there which is apparently material energy,
which you can call wood, stone or XYZ.
But that apparent material energy is also there.
And Krishna personally is also there who looks exactly like that form which we have carved out of wood or stone.
So this is the sign of deity.
So when some Muslim invader is coming, so there is a great deviant.
They claim themselves to be follower of Sanatana Dharma, but they don't believe in deity worship.
Why? The concept is because the founder of this sect, he saw the rats climbing upon the deity.
And then he concluded this deity cannot save himself from rats.
How the deity can save us? And thus he rejected deity worship.
So they don't understand that Krishna is simultaneously present there,
as well as that apparent material form is also present there.
So when somebody is breaking the deity, he is not breaking that.
He cannot even approach, cannot touch that spiritual form.
We have read from Bhagavad Gita,
The spirit cannot be moistened, cannot be cut, cannot be dried.
This is the science of spirit.
So there is no question of any matter getting to do any harm to spirit.
So so-called whatever harm they are doing that is happening to the apparent material form, which is also present there.
This is called the spiritual dynamics.
Krishna is opening his mouth and all the universes are present within Krishna.
So how is it possible in a small body? All the universes are present. That is possible.
So when Krishna comes here, not only all the universes,
but all the various Vishnu forms are present in the same body.
So some people, when they approach the temple, they do not feel anything at all.
There is no revival of relationship.
They are just able to appreciate that.
And they will tell, oh, it is matter only. It is wood. It is stone.
What is their special in that? Because they are conditioned.
Their eyes are material. They can only see matter over there.
But Krishna is present there completely.
So when the devotees are advanced in spiritual life, simply by coming to temple,
they feel great ecstasy because they are seeing the spiritual form, which is present there.
So when Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu saw Jagannath, he got so much pleasure that he immediately fainted.
So there is a great pleasure simply by seeing, beholding the form of Krishna.
So just his spiritual life is so nice.
So simply we have to purify ourselves.
And when purification is sufficient, then simply by seeing the form of Krishna, remembering Krishna,
chanting about Krishna, hearing about Krishna, fills the heart of devotees with great pleasure, unlimited pleasure.
So it is so nice. So we need not run anywhere outside for pleasure.
Pleasure is right here. We simply have to purify ourselves.
So this is called Shantrasa when you go and you appreciate the form of Krishna.
Now when the devotee advances further, then that next level is called Dasa Ras.
Dasa means, just like Lord Hanuman, his relationship is that of a servant.
He likes to serve Krishna by carrying out all the orders very, very nicely.
And simply by carrying out the orders, he is in complete bliss and ecstasy.
So much so that he tore apart his chest, but he is not at all affected.
He is feeling unlimited joy and happiness in his heart.
So this is Dasa Ras, positive seva. So this is expected at least.
Devotional service begins from here.
So try to render some service to Krishna.
Don't now make Krishna your order supplier.
Krishna, give me this, give me that.
In this way, most of the people, they put so many demands to Krishna.
So obviously, if anybody is approaching Krishna for any reason, that is good.
He will get purified.
But advanced level of understanding is God is my father.
He has been providing to all those animals who have no information about God.
No animals except dog, they starve.
Sufficient food for them is there.
How to detect their food, that arrangement is also there.
All this arrangement is there.
So Krishna will fulfill. I was there in the womb of the mother.
How Krishna fulfilled everything very nicely.
And when I came out, exactly at that time, there was milk in the breasts of the mother.
I could not have survived on anything else but the mother's milk.
Child cannot eat anything.
And the right kind of food is being supplied just when the child is born.
And when the child is grown up, that stops.
So just see how wonderful arrangement is there.
Child cannot task in the womb.
Neither the parents can supply even if they wish.
Just the right supply is going.
We should understand God is willing to take charge of our life.
In all the species, he's taking care of our lives.
So in human life, when we see any deficiency,
that is because of the misuse of the independence that we are doing.
So other species, they are completely under the laws of nature.
They are tightly controlled.
They have no freedom.
But in human form of life, freedom is given to us so that we can put common sense.
That, oh, I am being so nicely taken care.
Who is this personality who has taken care?
Who has done this wonderful arrangement?
And human beings should ponder, should wonder why he has done this arrangement.
But why I'm supposed to take birth here?
Why this machinery is so nicely designed that I never felt anything.
All supplies were taken care.
But why this machinery is created in the first place?
This is called Brahma Jagasah.
So if a human being inquires about this,
and then only that person would be satisfied.
And if he does misuse of the independence,
he goes away from such inquiry,
forgets God, then he creates so much of sinful actions in his life.
And thus he suffers so much in this life.
So now we understand that Krishna so nicely takes care.
So I should not ask anything from Krishna.
Krishna knows how to take care.
Now I should be rendering service to Krishna.
So now we should apply common sense.
So why do I love my children?
From where this tendency is coming of loving my children?
Because this tendency should be present in God.
And unless something is present in God, those tendencies cannot come in us.
All those tendencies which we have got,
all those features which we have got should be present in our origin.
Plus something more can also be there.
Something more should be there.
But at least whatever we feel we have,
these feelings we have adopted from our origin.
So what do I expect from my children?
So mother has given birth to child.
Prabhupada gives a very striking example.
Now if the child tells mother,
this is very boring, this life.
Can I merge again into your womb?
So will mother be happy by such a proposition?
No.
In a similar fashion,
yes if somebody is not willing to have life,
he wants to merge into Krishna's light or Krishna's body,
Krishna accepts such soul also.
But that is not what Krishna desires.
We can simply understand by understanding our psychology.
So we are like drop.
Mama evansho ji viloke.
We are ansha of Krishna.
Just by analyzing a sample water,
we can analyze the entire ocean.
In a similar fashion,
one who can understand self,
he can understand God also.
So mother would not like that the child merges again in the womb.
So why should we create such desires?
Krishna, I want to merge in you or merge in your Jyoti.
This is very displeasing to Krishna.
Parents produce children so that they can enjoy with them,
have a relationship.
So God wants me to have relationship.
So human life is meant to revive and rediscover that relationship,
which I have forgotten and to reestablish that relationship
and any relationship begins with seva, with service.
So just like earlier in arranged marriages,
so now all of us who are young,
we might not have experience,
but if anybody is having experience of earlier times,
arranged marriages,
husband and wife have no idea of each other
and they are married and there is no love.
There is no relationship.
So how the relationship is established,
they start serving each other.
The wife learns from the mother,
mother-in-law that what are his likings,
what are dislikings,
and then he serves,
she serves nicely.
He takes nice care of the wife.
In this way,
there is a relationship by exchange of services.
So the real devotional service begins from Dasirasa,
when we actually engage ourselves in relationship.
That is why among all the rules and regulations of deity worship,
one regulation is whenever we are going to temple,
we should not go empty hands with empty hands.
Just like whenever we visit any relative,
we carry some gifts,
we carry some sweets,
chocolate, something.
That is the etiquette.
Don't go empty hands.
In a similar fashion,
empty handed,
we are not supposed to enter temple.
This is defying the injunctions of deity worship.
Always carry something with you.
That is why those people who know,
they come with some bhoga.
There is a natural thing in our country.
They come with some sweets,
some fruits.
They put it to the,
give it to the altar
and then they are returned the prasadam
and then they distribute like that.
So there is exchange.
So Krishna,
from Krishna's side,
some prasadam is given
and they give something to be offered to Krishna.
This is the standard in all the temples.
This is the etiquette.
So why this etiquette?
Because we are trying to establish relationship with Krishna.
Father is not thirsty,
but the small child, toddler,
he somehow manages to arrange some water
and small cup or glass for father.
Father drinks it.
Just so that because he is very happy
seeing that my son is willing to render me some service.
In a similar fashion,
Krishna wants us,
encourages us to re-establish this relationship.
And thus all these rules and regulations are there
simply to re-establish.
So this is called dasa rasa.
And higher than dasa rasa is sakha rasa,
just like Arjuna.
So Arjuna is serving Krishna as a friend.
We all like to have friends.
So God also likes to have friend.
So everybody is worshipping God with all in reverence,
offering him with great respects.
So God also wants to be intimate with some people.
So this is very high standard of spiritual life.
This is available only in Goloka Vrindavan.
So in spiritual life,
there are various planets,
just like here we have from our scientific laboratories,
we have description of various material planets
because they can see only up to here.
But there are some sages who travel.
Now our robots can only go to,
if at all they are sending to some nearby spheres
and they are giving some information.
There is dust here.
There is this thing there.
But there are some very powerful personalities
who can travel to that spiritual domain.
And also in parampara we get this knowledge.
We understand that there are spheres
in another part of the nature,
beyond these material universes,
which are completely made up of spiritual energy.
And here we have various kings of different planets.
Now the people are very weak.
So one ruler is not able to rule the entire planet.
So many small rulers have created their own
small pockets called countries or nations.
But in spiritual world Lord Vishnu rules
and everybody is serving him very nicely
in Shantrasa, in Daserasa.
But higher than this you cannot enjoy with Lord Vishnu.
Vishnu means majesty, supreme controller.
All the opulences are in display.
Power, wealth, beauty, fame, everything.
So they are in knowledge.
But then Krishna reveals in Bhagavad Gita in the Vedas
When somebody worships me in knowledge of my opulences
that does not actually satisfy me.
So just like a small child,
he enjoys it very much when the parents take care of him.
So Krishna is taking care of the entire world.
Krishna desires somebody should take care of me also.
So unless they forget the opulences of Krishna,
how somebody can be anxious to take care of Krishna
He is God. What anxiety I can take.
He is taking care of himself.
Nothing can harm him.
So but then Krishna wants somebody should be anxious for me.
Somebody should love me in this way
that they are always protecting me, caring for me.
So all these higher relationships are possible only in Goloka Vrindavan
where people are...
So those who are not very advanced in devotional service,
they need to undergo knowledge of all these opulences
that we are studying in the Bhagavad Gita
and that is very important.
Now here Krishna is telling, we will see in the shlokas.
One who has knowledge of all these opulences,
why so much description Krishna is giving,
I am this, I am that, I control devatas,
I am Brahma, I am Shiva,
I am controlling Brahma, Shiva, Indra, Chandra.
Everyone is under my control.
They are part and parcels of my Virat Rupa.
Why Krishna is giving all such great description?
How everything is under his control
so that we can surrender unto Krishna.
And there is a stage.
By knowing all these opulences,
by worshipping Krishna, attachment grows so much
that a person doesn't bother about the opulences of Krishna.
That is called spontaneous.
Without any reason.
I don't want to know, I don't know Krishna is God or not.
I simply want to serve Krishna.
So those people who are able to worship Krishna
out of spontaneous affection,
now we may be chanting Krishna's name
because we know this is God's name.
We are doing every day very fixed up routine.
4.30, 5 o'clock, I have to do Mangala Aarti, all this.
Why? Because I understand Krishna is God.
My duty is to serve him.
But when spontaneously,
just like young friends, boyfriend, girlfriend,
they must be very eager to see each other, meet each other.
So this is called spontaneous attraction.
So in that way, when somebody is spontaneously attracted to Krishna,
only such people can transfer themselves to Goloka Vrindavan,
where higher pleasures are attained by the devotees
and attained by Krishna.
So Krishna tells when somebody worships me
in knowledge of the opulences,
that does not satisfy my heart
because there is distance.
From a distance, they are serving very nicely.
Of course, in great love, ecstatically,
but there is distance, there is reverence.
But in Goloka Vrindavan,
So these people are so advanced
that they are sitting on the shoulders of Krishna.
They are wrestling with Krishna.
They are pushing him down.
And sometimes Krishna opens,
Krishna, let me feed you a laddu.
And Krishna will open his mouth
and they will put a flower instead of laddu in Krishna's mouth.
In this way, can we imagine such jokes with Supreme Lord?
No. In Vaikuntha, it is unimaginable.
It's a great offense.
But in Goloka Vrindavan, it is allowed.
And Krishna is so nicely taking care of his
when they had gone out with cows,
all the coward friends.
And then Brahma stole away all the cows and calves.
They went away.
And all the friends were seeing,
what is this?
So he told you all, play, you eat very nicely.
Don't worry. I'll bring the cows.
I'll do the work for you.
In this way, Krishna is acting as a close friend of his devotees.
Then when the devotee advances further,
there is Vasalya Rasa.
Higher than friendship is when the devotee acts as
order supplier of Krishna.
Krishna demands, give me this.
And he takes anxiety.
Krishna is not anxious to protect him.
He's anxious to protect Krishna.
Yashoda, Nanda Maharaj, always anxious.
So where is Krishna?
Krishna has eaten or not?
This anxiety.
So that is why all these rules and regulations which we follow.
So this level, when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was hearing,
what is the ultimate aim of life?
Sardharmana Parityajya, Varna Ashrama,
all these things were being described by Ramanandaraya.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu told it is external.
It is external.
Sardharmana Parityajya,
forgetting all the duties, surrendering to Krishna,
this is also external.
After forgetting all the duties, what will you do?
That is positive.
Then Dasya Rasa, okay, tell further.
And when this knowledge was spoken about Vasalya Rasa,
then he spoke, oh, this is nice.
So this is Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's teaching.
This is actual devotional service.
When you are anxious to take care of God,
you are not asking anything from God.
And when the devotee advances even further,
then there is Madhura Ras.
That is the pleasure between Krishna and his wives
or the gopis of Vrindavan.
In Madhura Ras also there are,
there is Swakhi and there is Parikhi Ras.
Swakhi Ras, Swakhi pleasure means
the pleasure which Krishna would enjoy with his wives.
So when Krishna's wives,
they met with Mother Rohini.
So they were very very eager to understand
Krishna's pastimes in Vrindavan.
Why? Because they are telling,
we are serving Krishna so nicely,
we are acting as his maidservants,
fulfilling all his desires.
But Krishna is very eager to understand Krishna's pastimes.
So please tell us,
what are these Vrindavan pastimes of Krishna
which are captivating the mind of Krishna?
So there is this Swakhi Ras
which Krishna enjoys with his wives,
but higher than that is Parikhi Ras.
So the relationship after marriage,
the affection reduces.
And there is familiarity.
And there is also this Swakhi Ras
which is captivating the mind of Krishna.
So there is Swakhi Ras
which is captivating the mind of Krishna.
So there is Swakhi Ras
and there is familiarity.
And there is separation also in material world.
So the relationship
which exists without marriage
that is much more pleasing.
And that is called Parikhi Ras.
So in material world, this is very abominable pleasure.
We are not supposed to have it.
But in spiritual world, it is the highest pleasure.
And this pleasure is what Krishna
has with the gopis of Vrindavan.
And this highest kind of pleasure
is what Krishna Consciousness promises to the devotees.
And this highest pleasure
can be relished by Sankirtan,
by chanting and hearing the names of Krishna,
which is very very difficult to be attained
even by the residents of all Vaikuntha Loka.
Goddess Lakshmi wanted to enjoy this pleasure,
but she was not allowed to participate
in the Vrindavan pastimes.
So just see, this is the gift
which the souls of Kali Yuga have got.
We can enjoy this greatest pleasure.
And same pleasure is present in Srimad Bhagavatam,
the pastimes of Krishna.
So how to relish this Srimad Bhagavatam?
These pastimes, this greatest pleasure is provided
in the 10th canto of Srimad Bhagavatam.
So by reading the instructions of Krishna,
by hearing, chanting His names,
a person can...
So it is not an ordinary activity.
This is extraordinary activity.
That is why it is told about Srimad Bhagavatam.
Srimad Bhagavatam is the summary
of all the Vedanta Sutras.
And...
Any person who learns how to relish Bhagavatam,
he cannot be attracted by anything else.
So thus Krishna is telling,
if I tell you,
I am telling you all these instructions
for your benefit,
and it will give you great joy.
So in order to relish
these instructions of Bhagavad Gita,
we have to
come to the level of establishing
relationship with Krishna.
And for that, it is very very important
to come out of bodily concept of life,
first of all.
We have to forget this external designation.
I belong to this planet,
this nation, this house.
So these are all external
related to body.
And for that,
we have to come out of Anartha Nivritti.
What is Anartha Nivritti?
It is the thing which is holding us in bodily concept of life.
Artha means something which has value.
Anartha means something which has
no value, which is called useless.
So most of the things
which we are doing
are actually useless,
just like we were discussing yesterday.
Now people are working very very hard
to simply satisfy
the demands of the senses.
But fulfilling sensual demands
is useless.
Because
it is not that
we are suffering for lack of sense objects.
We are simply suffering because of lack
of some pleasure and that pleasure we get by
acting in these relationships,
which we just discussed with Krishna.
When these relationships are not there,
disturbance is there in the mind and body.
Then a person thinks,
oh, if I try to satisfy my
senses by giving sense object,
I will be satisfied. But that is useless.
Because the fire
increases further of the senses.
So people thinking
I'll get a good job in best company
of the world, I'll be happy.
The founder of the best company is dissatisfied.
And he in his
old age also is not satisfied with his affairs,
personal affairs.
So where is the question of being satisfied by
working for that person in whatever company
you can have? So all this is
wrong education that we have. By attaining
anything we can be happy. No.
So this is called anartha.
Anything which is not
required for satisfying Krishna in our
life, that is called anartha.
So that is why we should accept only Krishna
prasadam. Any food item
which is not offered
to Krishna, if I eat, Krishna will not be
satisfied. Krishna satisfaction is not
involved. So that is anartha. So we should
try that we are only having Krishna prasadam
in our life. Any kind of
activity which I am not doing for
satisfaction of Krishna, that is useless.
That is not going to satisfy me
or anybody. So all the activity
should be done for Krishna or the result
should be offered to Krishna. Then the activity
becomes worthwhile. Any kind
of sense enjoyment which is
not for just keeping body and soul
together for serving Krishna,
that is anartha. Now we are expanding it.
If I can live comfortably
in one small house, why
do I want a big house?
If I can somehow manage with limited set
of clothes, why do I want to expand my wardrobe?
So this is called anartha.
So human life is meant to minimize,
minimize the comforts. One prastha.
Okay, you give up all the comforts.
Wife, you cannot give up. Husband, wife.
So they are allowed to live together.
You go for tirsthal and
you go to the forest, meditate,
do sacrifice
and then after that, complete renunciation.
Wife follows the principles
from house and husband follows principles
in jungle. Perfect renunciation.
So in this way, all these
unwanted things which are simply
complicating our life, a person is supposed
to get free from their clutches.
This is called anarthni vritti.
So we should see anything which is
addicting me all these sense objects, I should
try to reduce. When I am
not doing
any overindulgence in sense
gratificatory objects,
I am satisfied simply by keeping
body and soul fit
for service of Krishna.
Then following bhakti yoga,
we can do anarthni vritti.
And after anarthni vritti,
a person understands I am not the body.
Strong faith comes, all these instructions
become very, very clear.
And once the instructions are clear,
strong faith comes, person
is able to
slowly relish
these instructions of Bhagavad Gita.
And when he
establishes the relationship with Krishna,
then these, all these instructions
become very, very ecstatic.
But Krishna tells this knowledge
it is not easy.
Nam evidhu surgana
prabhavam namaharshaya
surgana devitas
just like a child cannot
understand the governance system's
advanced things, we also cannot
understand universal affairs which are
run from the mind of the demigods.
They are aware of whatever is happening
in the entire universe, very powerful
but we cannot understand. But even
they are not able to understand Krishna, even
Brahma, the top most
demigod was not able to understand
Krishna, so he wanted to test by stealing
all the cows and calves of Krishna.
So when Brahma
cannot understand, then who?
Rishis can understand namaharshaya,
Rishis also cannot understand.
The great Rishis were not
understanding, Bhrigu, the leader, had
to go and personally he had to make all
of them angry to understand who is supreme.
Nobody is knowing. Why nobody
is knowing? Because Krishna tells
aham adirhi deva namaharshi namja
sarvasha, because I am the origin
of everybody, nobody
has come before me, so that is why nobody
knows my origin, because there is no
origin of mine. Aham adirhi
deva nam, I am the origin of all
the devatas and maharshis.
Yomam ajam anadimcha,
so a person who
understands Krishna is not
a historical personality who took
birth and who
has a beginning 5000 years ago, no.
Ajam anadim are the words used
here, who understands Krishna
did a drama of appearing
from father and mother. Krishna is
actually ajam, Krishna is unborn,
he becomes visible through
father and mother and then he becomes
invisible. And
anadim, he has no beginning ever.
So a person who is able to
understand Krishna in this way
lokmaheshwaram, ishwar means
controller, I am the controller of this
world, sarvapapai
pramuchyate, he becomes freedom from all
past wrong doings, sins
for which he is suffering and
becomes freed from all the sufferings of this
world.
So
how to attain this
level which
Krishna has mentioned here.
And without this we cannot
relish this knowledge.
So
a very important factor.
That is why
the teachings of Chaitanya maha prabhu are so
nice, it is being described in Chaitanya charita
amrita, a very great secret.
Very very confidential knowledge.
So Chaitanya maha prabhu
was on his south India visit
and he
came across Sri Ranganath temple,
very huge temple of south.
And in the Ranganath temple
he saw Brahmana was reading Bhagavad
Gita.
And this Brahmana was illiterate.
So on the day of initiation
the spiritual
master was knowing that my disciple
is illiterate, but he gave
him instruction. Now every day you read so many
18 chapters of Bhagavad Gita.
And
it is the duty of the disciple
to adhere
greatly to the instructions of spiritual master.
So this instruction was given
and the disciple is illiterate.
And
dutifully every day he
would read, try to read Bhagavad
Gita what he can read because he cannot.
So all the other people
they would make fun of him. Oh Brahmana how much
you have read what you are studying?
So nevertheless
he would not respond because they were making
fun. And when Chaitanya maha prabhu
came he saw he was greatly
absorbed in Bhagavad Gita
and turning it and like that.
And he was
crying reading Bhagavad Gita. So Chaitanya maha
prabhu he approached that Brahmana
and he asked that my
dear Brahmana what are you reading?
So he understood
Chaitanya maha prabhu is a great man
he is not making fun of me he is genuinely
asking. So he told actually
I cannot read anything I am not reading
but my Guru maharaj has
given me the instruction that you have to
read Bhagavad Gita every day.
So I am just somehow trying
to fulfill that instruction given
by my Guru. So maha
prabhu became very pleased. So he told oh if you
cannot read you are simply
turning it doing this thing then why
you are crying?
So he told so when I try to read
this Bhagavad Gita so
I have heard some
of these things how Krishna became
charioteer of Arjuna and that is what
is described in the Bhagavad Gita the message.
So when I try to read this
immediately this
picture of Krishna
driving the chariot of Arjuna
appears in my heart
and I feel great pleasure
out of it that how the supreme
personality of Godhead has
become the servant of his devotee.
So just like we are all working in
some places suppose
our boss or the supreme
boss chairman of our company
you are working for Tata group and the
chairman he
comes and he
becomes your cook
he becomes your driver I will drop you home
so how much grateful your
heart would be isn't it?
Oh he is dropping me home how much he cares
for me he will cook for me
the chairman of my company
he will do it for me oh how much he loves
his employees heart will become
full of love and what is
Krishna? Krishna is the controller of all
the worlds so this is
how you are feeling very emotional when I see
that Krishna is acting
as servant charioteer a driver of
his
his servant his disciple
his devotee my heart gets
full of these emotions and thus I cry
seeing this behavior of supreme
lord.
So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu told you have actually understood
Bhagavad Gita.
So here lies the secret of understanding
all the vedas all the
shastras
yes
we had seen in the previous
session the Hare Krishna that movie
in that we saw how these
disciples were very young who were
grastas and before that great
sanyasis were sent to preach abroad
but nobody could preach rather
they lost their habits some of them
but how these young disciples were able
to create Prabhupada told because they have understood
the secret of success of spiritual life
yes
who has implicit
faith in Krishna and equal faith
in spiritual master
he can understand
Vedic purports everything is revealed
to him and by attentive
reading of Bhagavad Gita such a person can
immediately see Krishna
in the pages of Bhagavatam
the book or within his heart
so immediately Krishna manifested
himself in the heart so when
somebody is very sincerely trying to
fulfill the instructions of spiritual master
these were the prayers we were
discussing Guru Pooja Guru Mukha Padma
Vakya Chitite Koriya Ekya
Aarana Kari Humane Asha
so the
instructions of spiritual master
should be accepted as life and soul
of disciples so when
the disciple is carrying out the instructions
in this way my life and soul
my life is simply to carry out the instructions
of spiritual master then
he gets all this knowledge
of the spiritual life
he understands he gets
very easily he understands
how he is not the body he
understands all the opulences of Krishna what
is his relationship with Krishna
and then when he reads the scriptures
immediately the form of Krishna is
awakened within the heart so that
is not imagination Krishna actually
becomes visible to such a devotee
by seeing his dedication to the spiritual
master that's it is told
yasya prasadat bhagavata
prasado yasya prasadan
nagati kotho pi Krishna is pleased
when he sees spiritual master
is being pleased so this is the
way of relishing
the scriptures Bhagavad Gita
that a person has
to be very very
eager to
make his life and soul
the instructions of the spiritual
master
and the first instruction of course
of the spiritual master is
to read the books
every day
ruparagunat pade hoi bhyakuti kabhi
ami bujabhose jugal piriti
so narottam das thakur
is telling when will i be very very eager
to read the instructions of the acharyas
and then i will be
able to understand radha krishna
this philosophy and their past
times so this is very great secret
so instruction of spiritual master
it is very great wealth
it is not given easily
spiritual master will not give instruction
when pravapada went to
one of the
places in gujarat
so some of the people were
willing to take instruction
that please swamiji
order we want to do some seva for you
so yeah you can please do
whatever is possible
we want to make a temple here
that is very nice so you please
order us and we will make
so pravapada was telling
yeah okay if possible you do you
can try no no you please order us
you know they won't order but pravapada
was not giving order then pravapada
explained them please understand
if i give order
instruction and you are not able to
fulfill then that would be great offense
on your part so that is why
you try if you are not able to do it
it's okay but if i order you and you
do it then that is great offense
so thus if spiritual master
is giving instruction that is a great
wealth of the disciple simply
fulfilling those instructions makes
one's life successful
and thus
chaitanya maha prabhu presents by his
example chaitanya maha prabhu is
krishna himself and he was known as
nimai pandit the greatest
debater of his time
the greatest
expert in logic
and chaitanya maha prabhu when he went to
spiritual master his spiritual master scolded
him
chaitanya maha prabhu
tells my guru told me
he saw me as the greatest fool
so why chaitanya maha prabhu will be
regarded as greatest fool so spiritual
master pravapada explains can
chastise for the
disciple for right reason or for
no reason but it is his duty to
chastise the disciple to keep him
rightly situated on the spiritual path
so he told you don't have right
upon vedanta philosophy you simply chant
the names of krishna so chaitanya maha
prabhu showed by his example
that house simply chaitanya maha
prabhu chanted the names of krishna and
he felt this unlimited ecstasy he started
becoming mad and then he went back to
spiritual master he told my dear spiritual
master what mantra you have given me
i have become mad by chanting this mantra
so spiritual
master ishwarpuri he became very
pleased you have got the result perfection
of krishna consciousness
so chaitanya maha prabhu told
that how it is so important to stick
to the instructions of spiritual master no no
i will read vedanta no don't read
if spiritual master is not told
so but however
for us pravapada struggled so much
he is given so many books so it is
pravapada's instruction the basic instruction
everything will develop automatically
if we have knowledge of krishna
then we will develop
renunciation we will develop
submissiveness we will follow
all the rules and regulations if knowledge is
there why we work very hard
for any entrance exam because knowledge is there
what is my outcome if
i sacrifice for this exam
so thus i request all
of you please try to
fulfill this basic
instruction of reading books
all these books are specially meant for the
people of kali yuga without book
reading regularly
it is very difficult to make one's spiritual
life perfect even if you do not
understand simply by reading
attentively this is the instruction of pravapada
you don't understand does not matter
keep on reading attentively and
try to understand as far as possible
and engage in the service of krishna
in this way all the spiritual knowledge
would be revealed to us
so i request at least this basic knowledge
all of you can follow
you can read every day on your own or via
facility where every day we read in groups
online this bhagavad
gita called bhaktivraksha program
so you can participate in that
or if it is not possible
to do that on your own you do but
please with a vow with regulations start
reading and be very very
eager to understand and know what are the
other instructions of pravapada
and when we follow those instructions
then all perfection is there in spiritual
life then we need not go here and there
for pleasure simply by reading
bhagavad gita chanting the names of
krishna so much pleasure is there
that devotee is satisfied in whichever circumstances
he is put in
