We have discussed Chatushloki Bhagavad Gita, the four core verses of the Bhagavad Gita and Arjuna's conclusion, what he understood.
The first conclusion is Purusham Shashvatam Divyam Param Brahma Param Dhamma.
Krishna is Param Brahma, we are Brahma, small sparks of spirit soul and Krishna is Param Brahma, the source of all such small sparks.
Param Dhamma, he is the ultimate destination, ultimate abode of all the living entities.
All the living entities, if we can elevate ourselves to the highest planet, highest position, that is Lord Krishna.
Pavitram Paramam, he is the supreme purifier. Purpose of human life is nothing but purification.
Lord Ishavadeva mentioned to his sons, who is king, that please do not think, enjoying senses is the aim of this life.
King's son could have enjoyed like anything, but he told no, this is not the purpose. The purpose is
Tapo Divyam Putrakayan Satvam Shuddhyet. Satvam Shuddhyet is the purpose.
So how that can be done? That can be done by doing Tapasya.
Human life is meant for voluntarily accepting discomforts, Tapaha.
And this word is so important, Tapasya. When Brahma appeared and he was confused.
He appeared on the lotus flower, he was the first living entity of this universe.
And then he could not trace the source of his origin. He tried to travel in the stem of the lotus.
He kept on traveling for many, many years. He appeared on top of lotus that is coming out from a lake.
Just like the lotuses grow on lake, this lotus grew on the lake, which is existing on the navel of Garbhodakshaya Vishnu.
So we can just imagine how big would be Garbhodakshaya Vishnu. In his navel, there is some water.
And that is very huge, like a lake from that lotus flower is coming on top of that Brahma came.
Brahma kept on traveling down, but he could not trace. It was so long the stem.
Then Brahma did not know what to do. Then he heard these two words, Ta and Pa.
Tapasya. Now because Brahma is most intelligent living entity of this world, most pious.
So he could understand that what is this Tapasya? How I am supposed to do it?
So just by hearing the words Ta, Pa, Tapasya, he started doing Tapasya, kept on doing it for a very, very long time.
I guess 100 celestial years of his time. And then finally Brahma was able to, by the dint of this Tapasya,
he was able to get the knowledge from Lord Krishna.
And Tapo Mein Hridayam Sakshat, Lord Krishna mentions in Bhagavatam, this Tapasya is my heart.
So everything in this world is nothing but Lord Krishna and his energies, his expansions.
So when a person is doing Tapasya, he is contacting Lord Krishna, that is Lord Krishna's heart.
Lord Krishna becomes very pleased that this living entity is trying to fulfill his ambition, his ultimate purpose of life.
So all living entities are supposed to have just this ambition of doing Tapasya for the purification of heart.
So this is the teaching of Rishabh Dev to his sons.
Tapo Divyam Putrakayaan Satvam Shuddhyet. Our existence should be purified, lust and greed should be washed from the heart.
And a person should be very peaceful, senses should be perfectly controlled, knowledge then it will manifest.
And in this peaceful existence, what will happen?
Because when your existence is purified, you will experience Brahm Sukh.
Brahm Sukh means supreme, Brahm means supreme and Brahm means spiritual.
You will experience spiritual happiness or supreme happiness.
So the King Sanmayas know already we are having so much happiness in our kingdom, we are kings of the entire planet.
So it is mentioned Brahm Sukhyam Tu Anantam.
All this happiness which as king you can enjoy, it is but flickering and temporary in nature.
But this Brahm Sukh, there is never ending happiness, there is no end to it.
Just imagine we do not have experienced a kind of happiness which never stops.
This kind of happiness we need to prepare ourselves to get.
And that can happen by Tapasya. Tapasya purifies us.
But Lord Krishna Arjuna is concluding he is Pavitram Paramam, he is the supreme purifier.
So among all the Tapasya mentioned, the greatest Tapasya is directly coming in contact with Lord Krishna.
Because Krishna is supreme purifier, nothing else can purify us like that.
So although one Tapasya could be very very difficult, very hard to follow standing on one leg on the Himalayas.
Like all the demons they have done in the past or some various yogi sages they have done in the past, now also they are doing in the Himalayas.
But the Tapasya which is most powerful, that is directly coming in contact with Lord Krishna.
That means serving Lord Krishna, service of Lord Krishna and Krishna.
There is no difference between the two or among all the manifestations, the service, the holy name.
The place of Krishna, activities of Krishna, form of Krishna.
So directly associating with either of these things.
Either you see Krishna's form or you chant Krishna's name, engage your senses in the service of Krishna.
These are all the same.
But the most feasible means by which Krishna has made himself available for our purification in this yoga is chanting his names.
So thus chanting of the holy name is the strongest, is the most powerful process of purification.
So that is Arjuna's conclusion.
Human life is meant for purification and Krishna is Pavitram Paramam Bhavan.
So that is why anybody who is doing Tapasya without serving Lord Krishna, you can show him this verse of Bhagavad Gita, the conclusion given by Arjuna.
Bhagavad Gita is a Yogashastra.
So any yogi can be just shown this verse.
Sir, why you are not telling us to directly engage ourselves in service of Lord Krishna?
He's supreme purifier, Pavitram Paramam Bhavan and Purusham Shashvatam Divyam, Lord Krishna.
So because it is being discussed here that he's supreme abode, abode means land or house.
That is not a person, but it is well known Lord Krishna is a person.
Pavitram Paramam Bhavan, he's sustaining all the living entities by expanding himself as the spiritual world.
But at the same time, he maintains his personal existence.
Purusham Paramam Bhavan.
Purusham Shashvatam Divyam.
He's Shashvat means eternal Purush.
Adi Devam Ajam Vibhum.
He's the source of all other devitas.
Adi means origin.
Various devitas we worship, we get confused.
Oh, is this devita God?
So Arjuna's conclusion is no.
Adi Devam, he's the source of all devitas.
Ajam, he's unborn.
He does not take birth.
Every other living entity has taken birth except Krishna.
That is why he's called Ajah, unborn, eternal.
Purusham Shashvatam.
So this is Arjuna's conclusion.
Next, Lord Krishna is very beautifully describing
various manifestations of his in this material world
that we see around us so that a common man can meditate.
Why Lord Krishna is describing all these various forms
when the object of meditation is very, very clear
mentioned in these verses and Arjuna has clearly understood,
then why is expressing further desire to understand
about this subject matter of material manifestations.
So this we will understand.
Before this, let us understand this very nice lesson
that was imparted by prostitute.
It looks like the prostitutes were also very, very advanced
and intelligent in the Vedic culture.
And it is a fact, everyone was advanced.
Now, even the wisest man is most dull
because this Bhagavad Gita scripture which we are reading,
if you pick up, it may be difficult to understand,
but the Bhagavad Gita is meant for the less intelligent class
of people who do not have access to other Vedas.
So we can just imagine what was the intelligence
of less intelligent people of that time
that the scripture was spoken for them.
So this man was there who was attacked with leprosy
and he had become invalid.
So the wife had to carry this man in a basket
whenever he was required to move.
And the wife was very dutiful,
very nicely serving the husband,
trying to please him in all the possible ways.
So ultimately we are rebellious of God.
So now in this material world,
everyone is being trained to act as servant of somebody.
So they have their duties.
The Shudra has got duties towards the higher classes.
He has to act as a servant.
And all the subjects in the kingdom,
they are supposed to act as servants of the king.
They are supposed to perfectly follow
whatever instruction is being given.
In a similar fashion,
the child is supposed to act as servant of the parents
and the wife is supposed to act as servant of the husband.
In this way, Vedic culture treats everybody
to learn this art of servitorship.
So everyone should see their master
as the supreme personality of Godhead.
In this way, they are trained to serve
the supreme personality of Godhead
and they make advancement gradually in the spiritual life.
So she was following her Dharma very nicely
of dutifully taking care of the husband.
But this husband,
despite all the best services by the wife,
he had harbored a desire
of enjoying with this prostitute by the name Lakshahira.
So Lakshahira means,
it is said that she would need
100,000 pieces of diamond,
big or small,
if anybody wants to enjoy with her.
So how people were getting so much money,
maybe so much wealth was available at that time,
but this was the term.
So this person,
he somehow heard that this prostitute is there
and she is so exquisitely beautiful
that people have to give so much of money
to enjoy with her.
He somehow developed
a very strong desire to enjoy with her.
So he is an invalid leper,
but he is having such desire.
So he was always unhappy.
So this wife one day,
she asked that,
my dear husband,
I am trying to carry out all my duties
very, very nicely.
You cannot move.
I am taking you in a basket.
So what is the difficulty?
Please tell me what is the source
of your constant unhappiness?
How can I make you happy?
So then he revealed,
actually, I want to enjoy with that prostitute.
Now she was confused,
but nevertheless,
she was very much devoted to the husband.
So she thought,
okay, let me make my husband happy.
But now how to arrange such money?
So she devised a plan
and she went to the house of prostitute
and she started serving the prostitute.
Whatever task,
any duties,
service was available,
she was doing
without asking for any money.
So like this,
she kept on serving very,
very nicely for a long time.
So this Lakshahira prostitute,
she noticed that the servant has come
and she has not asked for any money,
remuneration, salary,
and she's working just like that.
And it's been so many days.
So she asked out of inquisitiveness
that please let me know
what can I do for you?
What do you want?
You have been just,
I'm seeing you are coming here,
you're serving very nicely
and you never asked for anything.
What can I do for you?
Please reveal your motive.
So then she told that I belong to such a house
and my husband,
he wants to enjoy.
So we cannot afford that,
but if you can kindly satisfy my husband.
So she told,
okay, no problem.
Bring your husband.
I will do this favor.
So then the husband was brought
and the prostitute,
the prostitute,
she cooked very nice dishes for the man
and the man was served everything.
So Prabhupada tells
that is why it is mentioned
in the Nectar of Instruction.
Nectar of Instruction,
11 verses are mentioned
for those who want to start
the spiritual life,
the basic instructions.
And the first instruction
of spiritual life is,
If you want to spread this knowledge to others
or even have your self-realization of the knowledge,
the first step is,
one has to control the six vegas,
which are the six vega.
Vega means force of the body.
The urge to speak.
We cannot control our tongue.
The force of the mind.
Mind is always pulling us
into so many other directions.
Very palatable dishes we want to have.
Force of the belly
and reproductive organs.
So the first step is,
one has to control the six vegas,
which are the six vega.
Vega means force of the body.
Vacha, vegam,
the urge to speak.
We cannot control our tongue.
And reproductive organs.
Force of anger.
These are the six strong forces within the body.
So anybody who can control these six vegas,
he can understand this knowledge
and he can spread this knowledge
across the entire earth.
So from here our spiritual life begins,
controlling all the six vegas in the body
very, very nicely.
And the two vegas are coming just from the tongue.
Tongue's job is how to speak
and how to taste.
So if the tongue is not controlled,
if a person is speaking anything and everything,
Prabhupada tells,
and the mind is not controlled,
we are letting the mind go anything,
do anything, think of anything,
then we cannot control upastha vegam,
the force of the reproductive organs.
Sex desire would be very, very strong
and it would be impossible to advance in spiritual life.
So it falls in the straight line.
Tongue, belly and genitals.
So thus tongue should be controlled
and then belly would be controlled
and then we can follow the path of controlling
this very strong sex urge in the body,
which is jnana-vijnana-nashana,
which is destroyer of the urge of spiritual advancement.
The urge will go away.
Somehow in good association,
a person realizes,
yes, I should follow spiritual life now.
But when he is not able to control this sexual urge,
then spiritual urge gets finished.
Then one does not feel like making spiritual advancement.
Enthusiasm goes away.
So it is very, very important.
In other yogas,
first you have to follow brahmacharya
and then talk of advancement.
But bhakti yoga is so powerful.
Simply by coming in contact with the supreme purifier,
Lord Krishna,
automatically a person is able to control the senses.
Nevertheless, an effort has to be put
to bring it under control as soon as possible.
So when a person tastes very palatable dishes,
very rich food items,
if we have,
then it is very difficult to control
the sex urge within the body.
So that is why it is told
that a person should have very regulated diet.
This is the first condition.
Even among the prasadam,
if you are having just prasadam,
nothing else,
because now we are not so advanced.
If the prasadam also is very, very rich,
then we will get carried away by this
urges within the body.
So the prostitute would feed all the clients
very, very nicely
so that their senses become agitated
and then they can enjoy nicely.
So if a person is very satvik,
it is difficult to arouse such desires in the body.
The skardham muni,
he was living in a hut
and kardham muni's wife Deva Hoti,
she was daughter of Manu,
the original person,
the father of mankind.
And she was serving kardham muni very nicely.
Kardham muni was just engaged in his sacrifice
in his yajna service of Krishna
very, very nicely
and could not pay much attention
to the desires of the wife.
But wife also never asked.
She was doing her duties very nicely.
Then he noticed one day that
I have married, see this is princess
and now she is living in hut
in such great austerities.
She has become so lean, thin.
So it is my duty.
I'm a grasta.
I should satisfy my wife.
And then he thought now in this hut,
this satisfaction is not possible.
Then he created a huge palace
and having all the luxuries
and then he satisfied his wife.
So in a satvik place, in satvik food,
it is difficult to have such urges
within the body.
So this prostitute would feed the clients
very nicely so that their senses are aroused
and then they can enjoy.
So this prostitute fed the leper
very nicely cooked all varieties of dishes
and then served the dishes, everything,
all the item in two kinds of parts.
Gold part and iron part.
So then this person notices that
what is this strange thing?
So he asked why you are serving me everything
in two different parts.
So she told I just wanted to know
whether you will get any different taste
by eating in that other part.
So it will know it is the same.
The soup in the golden part and iron part,
the taste is the same.
So the prostitute told,
then why have you come here to me now?
The taste is the same.
So this is very important lesson actually.
So prostitute told the taste is the same.
Your wife is having one vessel.
I am another vessel.
I am another part.
So the enjoyment of the senses is the same.
Whether you are enjoying with your wife
or you are enjoying with me,
it is only mental concoction
that if I put this sweet rice
or any nice dish in a golden pot,
the taste would increase.
This is what we think.
And this is what is our education.
It tells us simply keep on changing the pots.
And then changing the pot
will actually change the taste of the dish.
But this is illusion, hallucination.
So right now people fantasize
of beautiful people, celebrities.
Oh, if I could have them as my partner
or if I could enjoy with them,
life would be so nice.
How lucky those people are.
But all those people also
are having somebody as their partner,
as their friends or as their spouses.
So we should understand,
is that person happy?
I think if I get this man or woman in my life,
I would be so very much happy.
Already somebody is having
or going to have them in their life.
Will they be so much more happy?
No, this is all illusion.
The distress would remain the same.
Same kind of cribbing,
same kind of fighting
and same kind of dissatisfaction
exists between all the people.
But a person thinks,
if I get this golden pot,
very beautiful body,
then I will have very nice enjoyment.
Pleasure would be more.
So this is very, very, very important point.
We are simply thinking of changing the parts,
enjoying the same pleasure in different parts.
Dog part, cat part, man part, demigod part.
So ultimately, these are all different parts.
The same pleasure which he dog and she dog
are enjoying in the street.
A man and woman or a demigod
and demigoddess are enjoying.
Ultimately, the taste is the same.
The pleasure is the same.
So we think if I just change the pot,
so this is hallucination.
So as one devotee was telling
that he went to meet one of his relatives
here in the same city, Mumbai.
And he met this relative around 20 years ago.
And then this person was living in a house,
three BHK house in some plant outside the city.
And then he worked very hard.
He's very successful person.
Now he's CXO in one of the big companies.
And sorry.
Then after some years,
he met him around 10, 12 years ago.
And again, he was same in three BHK house,
but in another location in a better city.
Then recently met him in Bombay.
Again, he is living in the same three BHK house,
although in a very posh location in a posh apartment.
So ultimately, where is the growth?
The pot is the same.
I am thinking that this good apartment in a good locality.
So that will give us.
So this devotee was being shown the house.
He spoke in his mind that what will I do to see the house
as soon as it begins, it ends in a few feet.
So all this hard work simply for living in the same house,
even the size of the house has not increased.
Cost has increased.
And you are thinking hallucinating.
Oh, this three BHK is very nice because it is 10 crores.
And that three BHK was not good because it was some 10 lakhs.
So this is not giving any more pleasure.
The pleasure is the same.
Whether a person gets covid in a small house,
he gets covid in a big house or in a palatial apartment,
the pain of covid is the same.
So just like the pain is the same, the pleasure is also same
because pain and pleasure, they are sides of the same coin.
These people do not understand.
Just like a moth, if moth thinks fire is pleasure,
that same fire is going to end his life also.
If a person thinks the snake's body is very nice,
it is very, very cooling, the snake will kill that person.
So in a similar fashion, the pleasure and pain are the same thing in the material world.
The absence of pain is taken as pleasure.
That's it.
Nothing else.
It is the same.
If you are picking up pleasure, you are touching pain also.
That is on the other side.
You will very soon see that face also.
So that is the nature of this material happiness.
As soon as you touch material happiness,
happiness, distress, they are the same things.
Example given is stool.
Sometimes in the field there is stool
and top portion has got dried by the sun and air,
but the bottom portion is wet.
So wet stool a person hates.
So this is not good.
Dry is okay.
So a person may think this dry stool is better,
but ultimately dry or wet, it is stool only.
It does not become a sweet cake.
So in a similar fashion in this material world,
everything is bad.
When the suffering reduces, then a person thinks,
oh, this is very nice.
I am happy in my life.
But happiness, distress, they are the same things.
And this thing a person is enjoying.
First of all, it is hallucinatory,
but this hallucination increased by thinking,
oh, if I get this happiness in a better pot,
I would be happy.
If I have a big house, one acre villa,
so I'll be more happy.
I will have a better sleep, more sound sleep.
So sleeping enjoyment is better in a big house
than that in a small house,
or that a dog is enjoying in the street.
No, the sleeping pleasure for the dog on the street
or a poor beggar somewhere in the station
or of any person who is sleeping in very big,
luxurious house is the same.
After sleeping, there is no difference.
Similarly, eating, eating pleasure is same.
Of course, a person who has worked very hard
may get diabetes, may get many other diseases.
He cannot enjoy eating pleasure also.
For this hard work, his mind is so much agitated,
he may not get sleep pleasure also,
which a simple villager can enjoy.
So this is all hallucination.
So simply we want to change pots,
but the pleasure remains the same.
And how this starts?
This hallucination by association.
Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita,
A person meditates upon the sense objects,
then develops attachment for it,
and then is developed kama,
means lusty desire, desire to enjoy that object.
So this man heard about Lakshahira from somewhere.
Had he not heard about Lakshahira,
there is no question of developing the desire to enjoy,
and there is no question of moroseness,
which comes out of not being able to enjoy.
So this is happening in our life.
We associate with some people,
and then they tell,
Oh, if you go to this college,
college is another pot,
you will be more happy.
But ask those people in that college,
are they more happy?
Or if I get somebody who is working very hard,
and one of the devotees for promotion,
and he is applying here,
I told, why?
What happened to your peacefully chanting some time back?
So he is telling,
No, probably actually,
now I want to get married,
and good proposals are not coming
because I am having a mediocre job now.
So for getting a good match,
he is now trying to get a better job.
People want to correct UPSC examination
for getting a good husband or a good wife.
They think like that.
Building their profile for a good life partner.
Good means better pot.
So this is all hallucination.
So that person will go to somebody,
or such persons have gone to somebody,
ask them, are they happy?
Many people are studying in that college,
your dream college,
where you are now or you could not get.
Are those people happy?
Many people are there in the dream country,
better pot America.
Are those people happy?
No, simply changing the pots.
Ultimately, the item remains the same.
But if you are hankering to change the pot,
we will get so much disease by material afflictions.
We will not be able to enjoy that contents of the pot either.
So by Krishna's arrangement,
by laws of nature,
a person should remain.
That is why Lord Krishna mentions throughout Bhagavad Gita,
a person should learn how to remain satisfied
in the arrangement given by the Providence.
With regulated work,
whatever is coming of its own accord in life,
a person should be satisfied with that.
So we have to understand it is simply hallucination.
Simply hallucination.
Same dissatisfaction is there with every person.
Same dissatisfaction is there in every job.
Same dissatisfaction is there in every house.
It could be costlier one or a less expensive one.
These are just different pots.
So we should not waste this valuable human form of life
just for enjoying the same taste
which is available even in the animal farms.
We should try to utilize this human form of life
for tapasya, for self-purification,
so that we can develop a higher taste,
and that higher taste is Krishna Consciousness.
So please do not waste,
please do not try to save time from Krishna Consciousness
and just trying to change the pot,
thinking that getting some fame
and getting into some circle,
having some other amenities
will make you happy
and not going to make us happy
even by a fraction, even by 1%.
This knowledge is very important.
Even the prostitutes were having this knowledge.
So we are supposed to have this knowledge in our life.
We should save time,
save time for Krishna Consciousness.
Krishna Consciousness is the platform of happiness,
so much so that
In other yogic process,
a person has to do lot of intellectualization
and lot of restraint of the airs within the body
and control his breath, eating, sleeping, drinking, everything.
Then he is able to control the senses.
But Krishna Consciousness is so nice,
a person gets higher taste
and automatically does not feel like enjoying the lower tastes.
This is called actual advancement.
But otherwise, if you don't enjoy Krishna Consciousness,
then we are simply tasting the same thing in different pots.
And if you want to work very hard to change the pot,
that makes our life miserable.
So then we again go through these stages.
We hanker when that object is not there.
First of all, it is an artha.
It is not required simply by bad association,
association of materialists.
They will tell, oh, this is very nice.
Crack this exam or this job is very good.
Do this job or this achievement is very nice.
Have this achievement comes in the Forbes.
Your name should be in the Forbes list and XYZ.
So many other things.
And we think, oh, yes, if my name comes there, I'll be happy.
All those people who have got their names there,
are they happy and satisfied in their life?
No, equally dissatisfied.
Changing the pot does not matter.
Your name is coming in the attendance list of your class
or that in the Forbes magazine.
There is no difference of happiness.
Name can appear anywhere.
But the difference will be there when the name appears in the good books of Krishna.
Krishna notices, oh, this devotee is doing very nice seva.
Then there is happiness in our life.
So we should not waste this valuable life in this useless endeavor.
And thus creating more miseries in our life of hankering.
When we get that fear that we may not lose it and eventually we will lose it,
everything being temporary in nature, then lamentation.
In this way, always anxiety, fear, lamentation,
creating unnecessary unwanted trouble in our life.
So we have to be very, very careful of association.
By wrong association, a person starts meditating upon the sense object.
He hears, oh, this nice car has come, Tesla electric car.
I also should have it. All the rich people are having it.
Then if I don't have it, then I'm feeling bad.
Oh, my company should make this much turnover.
If I do not have it, I feel bad like this.
We in association, we think something is good for me.
I should also attain this mark.
So on the other hand, association should be there with the devotees.
Just like in the association of materialist,
a person develops these hallucinatory desire of changing parts
in the association of the devotees.
Only it is possible to cultivate the right knowledge.
So by constant thinking of Krishna, constant association of Krishna,
a person would be satisfied in his life.
And then by such nice engagement in seva,
he will come out of this hallucination, come out of this illusion.
But if a person is forgetful of Krishna, then he will fall for all these illusions.
That is why the aim of life is to
Always remember Krishna and never forget Krishna.
As soon as Krishna's memory is destroyed, a person forgets Krishna,
then he falls down. He's finished.
He falls for these hallucinatory concepts.
So in order to keep us on the platform of knowledge,
artificially it is not possible unless we are absorbed always in
in thoughts of Krishna.
And that can be attained by chanting of Hare Krishna Mahamantra.
So form of Krishna is known to Arjuna.
But here in these shlokas, which we are going to see now,
Arjuna is asking, as we can see,
verse number 16.
Please tell me in detail of your divine powers
by which you pervade all these worlds and abide in them.
How should I meditate upon you?
In what various forms are you to be contemplated, O blessed Lord?
So here, as Lord Krishna has already explained
that this is my form, eternal form.
This should be meditated upon.
But Arjuna is asking this question on behalf of common people.
So those people who are simply thinking of changing parts,
material desires, they cannot understand
the spiritual existence of Krishna.
They cannot put faith, understand a spiritual form
which has no beginning, which is eternal,
and this name which is non-different from God,
which is completely spiritual.
They cannot understand or put faith in the process,
this very simple sublime process.
So for them who cannot understand the spiritual nature of Krishna's form,
Arjuna is putting forth this question
because this is the nature of divine power.
Devotee is very much concerned about other people.
So Lord Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita,
I am not manifest to everybody.
I am covered by Yogamaya, by curtain of my illusory energy.
Just like a person is standing behind the curtain,
then we cannot see him or her.
In a similar fashion, Krishna has got this curtain of Yogamaya,
which prevents ordinary people to understand
the spiritual nature of Krishna.
Because they do not want to understand him,
they themselves want to become God.
So to such people, God does not reveal himself.
Now those people still Arjuna is wishing all good fortune for them.
So how they can also make advancement in spiritual life,
how they can develop some understanding and connection with God.
So he is asking, please let me know, how can I meditate upon you?
What forms you can be contemplated upon?
Tell me again in detail, O Janardhan,
of your mighty potencies and glories,
for I never tire of hearing your ambrosial words.
So this is the difference between material pleasure and spiritual pleasure.
As one devotee couple of days ago shared with me a story
where the Ambrosial words of Lord Krishna,
the Ambrosial words of Lord Krishna,
the Ambrosial words of Lord Krishna,
where the captain of the team and the coach they are telling
how this is very tiresome, physically more than physically,
mentally very, very exhausting,
doing the same thing day in and day out and then performing in the match.
It is mentally very, very draining.
So even something like sports in which studies are anyway
not very appealing for many people,
even sports which we are supposed to take enjoyment from,
they are telling it when you do the same thing day in and day out,
it creates a lot of stress.
That is what Sachin is telling.
What gives him pleasure?
Cleaning his car gives him pleasure.
That is his hobby.
He likes to clean his car.
So those who are cleaning the car every day, that is their job.
They want to play cricket.
And those who are playing cricket always to enjoy,
they want to clean the car, simply changing the pots.
But the pleasure remains the same.
So I want to just change this activity.
This is material world.
Simply keep on changing the activities.
Try to engage your mind in the hope of some satisfaction,
which we are never going to get.
Simply keep on changing.
So those people who are silent,
they want to talk when there is opportunity.
As soon as teacher is out, teacher tells do not talk.
Then as soon as there is opportunity, they will keep on talking.
And we met one of the directors of, I was speaking,
he is also a devotee of very big,
one of the biggest institutes of our country, coaching institutes.
So he tells, Prabhu, only on Sunday I get time,
Sunday or whatever day of the week.
On that day I keep complete mon vrat, complete silence.
Because entire day I have to speak morning to evening, so many classes.
On that day I do not speak at all.
So a person who is not allowed to speak,
he is taking pleasure in speaking,
who is speaking always, he is taking pleasure in not speaking.
All different parts.
But Krishna Consciousness, Arjuna is telling,
I am never tired of hearing your ambrosial words.
So this is the nature, Prabhupada, this is the test.
By this you can see you are advancing in spiritual life or not.
If by engaging in service of Krishna, you are feeling new energy,
yes, I want to increase more, I want to engage more myself.
You are not getting tired.
You are very eager to increase your time and your efficiency in service.
That means you are acting on spiritual platform.
And if you are feeling tired in Krishna's service,
that means you are still on the material platform.
So initially we may not feel as we do this activity more, our pleasure increases.
But in material world, law of marginal utility, diminishing returns.
If you do that activity more, the value of that activity decreases.
It becomes burdensome.
So Krishna is telling, I never get tired of hearing your glories.
So please explain your glories, your potencies,
by which you manifest yourself in this material world
so that I can meditate upon you.
Chintyosimam, meditating upon you is very important.
That Lord Krishna has explained in Bhagavad Gita.
Constant meditation upon Krishna, that is the aim of the living entity.
Now Lord Krishna gives the answer.
Sri Bhagavan Vacha,
hantate katha yashyami,
divya hi atma vibhutayaha,
pradhanita kuru shrestha,
naasti anto vistarasya me.
The blessed Lord said,
yes, I will tell you of my splendorous manifestations,
but only of those which are prominent to Arjuna,
for my opulence is limitless.
Actually everything is manifestation of Krishna.
But the prominent things Krishna is explaining.
So for those people who cannot appreciate spiritual existence of Krishna,
they can only appreciate matter
through matter how they can appreciate Krishna
that Lord Krishna is describing.
So that they can begin their meditation.
Just like many people tell,
why are you going to temple?
That is stone only.
They don't understand that stone.
That is not stone.
That is spiritual form of Lord,
which appears like stone.
So for them, they can understand.
Yes, some power is there.
Who has made everything?
Who is controlling nature?
Yes, so Krishna is telling,
aham atma guda kesha,
I am the self guda kesha,
seated in the hearts of all creatures.
I am the beginning, middle and end of all beings.
Aham atma guda kesha,
sarva bhuta shayasthitaha.
Asha means inside the heart.
So the most important factor
within this machine, within this body
or within this universe
is the consciousness.
If the consciousness is out of the body,
body is dead.
So as soon as a person sees consciousness,
he should understand this consciousness
is coming from Krishna.
Aham atma guda kesha,
so the source of the consciousness within the body
or the source of consciousness,
whatever manifestation we see in this universe,
Krishna is behind everything.
Aham aadish ca madhyam ca,
so whenever we see any consciousness,
we should immediately think of Krishna.
Just like by seeing a computer,
a person can immediately think of manufacturer.
Computer cannot come on its own.
So Krishna is telling,
by perceiving consciousness,
you should immediately think of the creator.
That is myself.
Aham aadish ca madhyam ca,
bhuta anam anta evacha.
And you can see this creation is so wonderful.
So many designs are there.
Every cell of the body is so fantastic.
By as soon as you notice any beginning here,
how this child is coming out of the bodies
of various species,
so well maintained,
so nicely arranged everything.
Whenever you see the beginning of any creation,
you should understand me.
Madhyam, whenever you see maintenance,
not just creation,
creation may be easy.
Maintenance is much more tough.
So how all the life is being maintained?
Whenever you see this wonderful arrangement of
maintenance,
just like many people,
they come to our temples,
and then they tell,
O Iskcon temples are so good,
very nice, very clean,
very nice management system.
So they immediately understand this.
These authorities are very good who are
managing the temple.
Everything is so good.
So whenever you see beautiful management here,
you should understand it is done by Krishna.
Madhyam, maintenance.
And you see very nicely,
timely destruction is also happening.
Then that destruction also,
whenever we see,
that is another feature of Krishna.
In this way,
a person should be thinking of God.
Even though directly he cannot understand who is God,
but he can appreciate God by creation,
maintenance,
annihilation,
and by the consciousness.
So there are various categories of demigods.
And among them,
one category of demigod is Aditya,
the sons of Aditi.
Among them,
I am Vishnu.
Of lights,
I am the radiant sun.
There are so many luminaries in the universe,
and there is no source of light like the sun.
So as soon as we see sun,
we get amazed,
Oh, wonderful source of light.
You see,
there are so many luminaries in the universe,
and there is no source of light like the sun.
There is no source of light.
We should immediately think of Krishna.
Marichir Marutamasmi.
Likewise,
another set of demigods are the Maruts.
So among all the Maruts,
controller of the winds,
heavenly spaces,
Marichi is the best.
So Marichi is also Krishna's creation,
Krishna's manifestation.
Nakshatranam aham shashi.
Similarly,
among all the stars,
moon is the brightest.
So when we see the beautiful moon,
we should immediately think of Krishna.
This moon is also manifestation of Krishna.
What is the meaning of this manifestation?
Just like the tree is there.
If you touch any leaf of the tree,
or you're seeing even the leaf,
it means you are actually seeing the tree.
Leaf is non-different from the tree.
If you are seeing any twig or branch,
that also means that is manifestation of tree only.
In a similar fashion,
all these living entities which are mentioned here,
so they are but manifestations of Krishna only.
At the same time,
it does not mean Marichi is Krishna,
or sun is Krishna,
or moon is Krishna.
The leaf is not tree.
The branch is not tree,
in that sense, the whole tree.
But in one sense,
they can be called tree
because they are expansions of tree.
So as soon as we see,
we notice the leaf,
we notice the branch,
we notice the twig,
immediately a person should think of tree.
That's what Krishna is mentioning here.
So this is just a crude example.
If you take out all the branches,
leaves and everything,
tree is finished.
But even if you take out everything,
all the universes,
everything,
Krishna will still maintain his existence.
This is the nature of Krishna.
So whether we are seeing sun,
whether we are seeing moon,
whether we are seeing the devata,
we should think of Krishna.
These are partial expansions of Krishna.
Veda Naam Saam Vedo Asmi
Deva Naam Asmi Vaasavaha
Indriyaana Manashtasmi
Bhuta Naam Asmi Chetana
Of the Vedas, I am the Saam Veda.
Of the demigods, I am Indra.
Of the senses, I am the mind.
So these are the prominent.
Saam Veda is prominent among the Vedas.
That is Krishna's manifestation.
Of the demigods,
Indra is the topmost.
Indra is my manifestation.
Of the senses,
there are six senses in the body
and mind controls all other senses.
Mind is called the sixth sense
in the Bhagavad Gita.
So I am the mind.
Mind is very powerful.
In the living beings,
I am the living force.
Bhuta Naam Asmi Chetana
Rudra Naam Shankarashtasmi
Viteshoyaksha Raksha Saam
Vasu Naam Paavakashtasmi
Meru Shikhar Naam Ham
So just like there are 12 Adityas,
there are 11 Rudras.
Among the Rudras,
we know Lord Shiva,
Lord Shankar, he is the best.
So Rudra Naam Shankarashtasmi
Of all the Rudras,
I am Lord Shiva.
As soon as we see Lord Shiva,
we should understand
he is also manifestation of Krishna.
Of the Yakshas and Rakshasas,
I am the Kuvera, Lord of wealth.
Kuvera is the king of all the Yakshas.
Of the Vasus,
I am fire, Agni.
Vasus are another set of demigods
and Agnidev is most powerful among them.
When you see Agnidev,
who is there everywhere,
so I am Vasu among them.
I am Agni among the Vasus.
And of the mountains,
so many mountains you have,
but the tallest mountain is Meru in the universe.
So I am Meru among the mountains.
Purodhasaamcha mukhyamam viddhi partha brahaspatim
Senaani namaham skandha sarasam asmi sagaraah
Of the priests,
so Arjun know me to be the chief,
Brihaspati, the Lord of devotion.
Of generals, I am Skandha,
the Lord of war.
And of bodies of water,
I am the ocean,
sarasam asmi sagaraah
As soon as we see the ocean,
we should think of Krishna.
Maharshi nam bhrigul aham
Giraam asmi kamaksharam
Yajna nam japa yajna asmi
sthavranaam himalayaah
Of the great sages,
I am Bhrigu.
Bhrigu is the sage
who kicked Lord Narayan on the chest,
just to understand whether he is supreme Lord or not.
Is he beyond all the forces of nature?
Anger being most difficult to conquer,
he is beyond that or not.
So Bhrigu is so powerful.
He has the audacity and capacity,
although should not have been done,
but still Bhrigu went there
and he kicked Lord on the chest.
So we can just imagine how powerful he is.
Of the great sages,
I am Bhrigu.
Of vibrations,
I am the transcendental Om.
So here Krishna is telling,
Om is also coming from Krishna.
That is also my manifestation.
The topmost vibration.
Of all the sacrifices,
human life is meant for sacrifice only.
So yajnaanaam,
of all the sacrifice,
japa yajnaam asmi
So japa yajnaam is the topmost yajnaam
what we are doing.
So if anybody asks you
where it is mentioned to chant the holy name,
quote this verse.
10th chapter, verse 25
yajnaanaam japa yajnaam asmi
In another place it is told,
Lord Krishna tells,
yajnaarthaat karmano anyatra loko yam karma bandhanah
yajnaarthaat karmano
You should do duties.
Not that as people think,
I'll purchase better pot and enjoy.
No, you work very hard so that you can sacrifice
the results of your activities.
Yajnaarthaat only for sacrifice,
the work has to be done.
This people do not know.
By sacrificing,
you can enjoy much better happiness
than by arranging resources of material happiness.
And among all those sacrifice,
which is the best sacrifice?
That is japa yajnaam,
chanting the holy names.
So chapter 10, verse number 25,
chapter 9, verse number 14,
satatam kirtayantumam
So throughout the Bhagavad Gita,
Krishna has asserted this fact.
It is very important to chant his names always.
yajnaanaam japa yajnaam asmi
So this yajnaas are important,
not just for spiritual advancement,
but even for fulfilling material necessities of life.
So this another important science,
because people do not know,
just like the government is able to give us facilities
only when we give taxes.
Government maintains so many institutions,
roads, defense, various facilities,
just because we are giving the money to the government.
If money is not there,
then there would be no roads,
no hospitals,
no defense mechanism,
and so much suffering will come upon us.
In a similar fashion,
devatas,
they are satisfied by yajnaas.
So need not do separate yajnaas for individual devatas,
just by doing this japa yajna,
it is a topmost yajna,
not just we make tremendous spiritual advancement,
even the material necessities also are automatically fulfilled.
So among all the yajnaas,
I am japa yajna,
stha varanaam,
Himalaya of the immovable things,
I am Himalaya's.
So like this, Lord Krishna is explaining
the various manifestations in this material world
by which a person should immediately be able to think of Krishna,
immediately be able to appreciate God,
that all these things are coming from God,
Himalaya, such wonderful creation are coming from God,
and this topmost sacrifice is also expansion of God.
This vibration, Om, which we are chanting,
this also represents God.
Bhrigu Muni, such powerful sage,
he is also manifestation of God.
Sun we see, moon we see, anything that we see around us,
then Krishna will explain further.
When you drink water, you get so much of satisfaction.
This taste of water is also my manifestation.
In this way, a person should constantly be thinking of Krishna.
This is only life.
The life is meant to increase our progressive remembrance of Krishna,
so that a stage comes when every moment we are able to think of Krishna.
So let us try to imbibe these teachings very nicely.
Understand this very important message.
Let us not try to change parts.
Let us not try to change our situation.
The happiness remains the same.
Human life is meant to enjoy higher happiness.
So please save all the time.
Come out of all these amplifications,
artificial hallucinations in the mind.
Oh, pleasure is more in the other part.
No, please give up purchasing more parts.
That is adding misery to our life.
Just try to advance in Krishna consciousness by contemplating on Krishna.
So this is not necessary for us because by Krishna's mercy,
we are able to appreciate the spiritual manifestation of Krishna,
incarnation of Krishna in the form of Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna,
Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Ram, Hare Ram, Ram Ram, Hare Hare.
So now let us try to do this chanting and directly come in contact
with the spiritual incarnation, the holy name of Krishna.
And thus we will understand everything about Krishna
and will be away from these dangerous amplifications, hallucinations.
