Chapter 11 verse 46, Arjuna expressed to Lord Krishna, after seeing this universal form
my mind has become very disturbed.
And when Arjuna saw all those fearful forms, then Arjuna now is requesting to Krishna,
please show me your transcendental, four-handed, beautiful form.
And thus follows text no. 46.
Kiritinam gadinam chakrahastam ichchamitvam drashtum aham tathaiva
tenayavarupena chaturbhujena sahasrabaho bhava vishvamurte
O Universal Lord, I wish to see you in your four-armed form, with helmeted head and with
love, wheel, conch and lotus flower in your hands.
I long to see you in that form.
Now here again Srila Prabhupada explains, Arjuna is a pure devotee of Krishna and he
is not interested in seeing other forms as we have been discussing.
This is very important point.
So Arjuna first of all told Krishna to display his universal form and now he is requesting
Lord Krishna kindly show your four-armed form.
So in this way Lord Krishna is exhibiting his supreme features which no ordinary person
can display.
So sometimes it is told that we are following the principle of anthropomorphism.
It means when some people wonder why we worship God as a human, why God is having a human
form, why not any other form.
So some people, unfortunately so-called spiritualists also, they propound this theory that this
is anthropomorphism.
Actually God is formless but because human beings are predominant now, so they have assumed
a form which looks like those of human beings and thus they worship that form as God.
This is called anthropomorphism, imposing human form upon God.
So they tell actually God is formless or they tell XYZ, so many other theories.
And then eventually they will tell I am God.
So Arjuna in order to save the people from such confusions in future, he is telling Lord
Krishna, you please explain all the forms in the universe, how you are the source of
all of them.
So although Lord Krishna was present personally in front of Arjuna, but he was having two
hands, two legs, just like an ordinary human being.
And thus people can tell that Krishna is not God, he was another human being.
But somehow some people, some of his fans, they started worshipping like God and down
the line in passage of so many thousands of years, he has been now so very much widely
worshipped that people accept him as God.
But Arjuna and others, they were his fans and they started praising him so much, down
the line it has exponentially increased that praise and people are taking him to be God.
So in order to drive away all these concepts, no it is not anthropomorphism, it is not that
because we have two hands and two legs, so we think God also should have two hands and
two legs, it is the other way around as it is mentioned in Bible also.
Man is made in the image of God.
It is not that God has been made in the image of man, it is vice versa.
The reflection follows the original form.
Krishna doesn't follow the reflection.
So thus in Bhagavad Gita we will see in 15th chapter, Lord Krishna describes this material
world, the world made of material energy in which we are living.
It is reflection of reality.
Just like the reflection of tree appears inverted on water, in a similar fashion this material
world is reflection of original reality.
So this world is a kind of reflection of original spiritual reality.
These temporary fleeting experiences are reflections.
So thus we also have got a form which is reflection of the original form of God.
And thus Lord Krishna proved that do not think that I am also having two hands and two legs
and all of you are having two hands and two legs so we are all the same, no I am the original
and you are reflection.
And thus Lord Krishna exhibited in his body all the forms of this universe.
And he also exhibited the Narayan form, the supreme form of the creation, four handed
form.
Thus he proved that although I appear just like you but just see my opulence, I can have
many, many arms, I can display more than two arms, four arms of that of Lord Narayan and
I can display anything that you can expect to see in this universe in past, present and
future.
Thus past, present, future, all the dimensions of the universe Arjuna was able to observe
in one place.
Thus Krishna denied, rubbished all these theories.
No anthropomorphism, no imagination, no thinking that Krishna is also an ordinary human being
having just two hands and two legs, no.
Appearance is same but nature is totally different, Krishna's body is completely spiritual, we
have a difference.
We are spiritual but our bodies matter, material.
We live in this body when the body is old, gets damaged in an accident or by a natural
cause we leave, we enter another body.
Bhagavad Gita mentions, just like the old clothes are left behind, we pick up new clothes,
the soul takes up new bodies.
However,
Ishvara in the supreme personality Krishna,
the difference between dehi means the form, the person who is living within this external
form and this external form, deha and the dweller of deha is called dehi, Vibheda, difference
which exists for us, na Ishvara Vidyate, it does not exist in Ishvara, supreme personality.
So Krishna is completely spiritual, just like the cyborg Sophia which they brought sometime
some years ago in Mumbai, in IIT here.
It appears just like a girl, a human being, although bald headed, not having hairs.
That also can be artificially put.
So the cyborgs or some robots can be made to appear just like human beings but the nature
of our body and their body is completely different.
We are having natural intelligence, they are having artificial intelligence.
We have cells, membranes, blood, mucus, bones, bile.
They have some titanium, some other alloys and circuits and wires and chips.
So although appearance is same but nature is different.
In a similar fashion, although appearance of Krishna and other living entities are same
but nature is completely different.
So this is what Lord Krishna has described very beautifully so far in this chapter and
in the previous verses also.
So Arjuna now after seeing the universal form, again wants to prove that the 400 form is
also coming from Krishna and thus he is telling, O Universal Lord, I wish to see you in your
four-armed form with helmeted head and with love, wheel, conch and lotus flower in your
hands.
I long to see you in that form.
So let us see what Lord Krishna answers.
The blessed Lord said, My dear Arjuna, happily do I show you this universal form within the
material world by my internal potency.
No one before you has ever seen this unlimited and glaringly effulgent form.
So he told this universal form which I showed you, no one has seen before.
O best of the Kuru warriors, no one before you has ever seen this universal form of mine.
For neither by studying the Vedas nor by performing sacrifices nor by charities or similar activities
can this form be seen.
Only you have seen this.
So if you want to see God, God has to agree to show it to us.
Even any ordinary person we have to meet here in person, then we have to have great qualification
if we need to meet great personalities, prime ministers, presidents, bureaucrats and all.
Any layman cannot go and just meet them.
So what to speak of God himself?
So thus Krishna is telling, no one before you has ever seen this form.
Why they have not seen?
Have people not been following spiritual life?
Have they not been reading Vedas, understanding about God?
So Krishna mentions, neither by studying the Vedas nor by performing sacrifices, yajna
nor by charity, you give up all your wealth or similar activities.
Can this form be seen?
It cannot be seen.
A person cannot see God by any amount of study of the Vedas, any amount of tapasya, any amount
of giving money in charity.
Only you have seen this.
Why?
That Krishna will mention.
What is the qualification which is required to see God personally?
So all these purports are very, very important.
So please go through these important purports of Bhagavad Gita.
Yeah, your mind has been perturbed upon seeing this horrible feature of mine.
Now let it be finished.
My devotee, be free from all disturbance with a peaceful mind.
You can now see the form you desire Sanjaya, now Sanjaya is telling this narration conversation.
The exhibition of form between Krishna and Arjuna, fortunately, is also being witnessed
by Sanjaya, who is disciple of Vedavyasa.
Vedavyasa is the original spiritual master.
He has given us the compilation of all the Vedas and nothing is hidden from Vedavyasa,
he being incarnation of Krishna.
So by his mercy, his disciple Sanjaya also is able to see all these things and he is
narrating now.
Iti Arjuna Vasudevas Tathoktva Swakam Rupam Darshaya Maasabhuyaha
Ashvasaya Maasachabhita Menam Bhutva Punasomya Vapur Mahatma
Sanjaya said to Dhritarashtra, the supreme personality of Godhead Krishna, while speaking
thus to Arjuna, displayed his real four-armed form, and at last showed him his two-armed
form, thus encouraging the fearful Arjuna.
So Krishna showed his four-handed form, Narayan form, and then he showed his two-handed form.
Arjuna Uvacha Dhrishtvedam Manusham Rupam Tavasamyam Janardana
Idhani Masmi Sambrittaha Sachetav Prakritimgataha
When Arjuna saw Krishna in his original form, he said,
Seeing this human-like form, so very beautiful, my mind is now pacified, and I am restored to my original nature.
Dhrishtvedam Manusham Rupam. So it is being explained here, the word used is Manusham Rupam.
Manusham means human being, Rupa means form. Seeing this human-like form,
Tavasamyam Janardana, which is so very beautiful, my mind is very very peaceful, pacified.
Now Krishna mentions very important words. Please hear with attention.
Sri Bhagavan Uvacha Sudur Darsham Idham Rupam
Dhrishtavan Asiyan Mamma Deva Apyasya Rupasya
Nityam Darshan Kankshinaha
The Blessed Lord said, My dear Arjuna, so Manusham Rupam has been already established.
Arjuna is now seeing Manusham Rupam, human-like form of Krishna.
Now Krishna gives very important instruction through Arjuna to all of us.
And what is that instruction?
Sudur Darsham Idham Rupam. The universal form which Krishna has been displaying so long,
so many verses, they cover that description. Krishna tells that this cannot be seen by reading the Vedas,
doing charity, austerities or whatever. It is very difficult to behold.
Nobody has seen this universal form before you, Arjuna.
And now, so that is Sudur Darsham.
Sudur Darsham means difficult, Darsham means to see, which is very difficult to see.
And the word which is used here for human-like form is, oh everyone, this human form,
everyone could have seen this universal form is rare, Virat Rupa,
in which so many universes Krishna is displaying in his body.
Brahma, Shiva, everyone is lying in Krishna's body.
Krishna has shown that I am the source of all of them.
So this form should be most rare to be seen. It is being told, no.
Sudur Darsham, the most rare of the rarest form, which is very very difficult to behold by anybody,
that is Idham Rupam, this form which you are seeing, my dear Arjuna,
the form which you are now seeing is very difficult to behold.
Dhrishtavanasyan mama deva api asya roopasya.
Deva means the devatas who are visiting Narayan many times,
and they are seeing the four-handed form of Narayan.
But even demigods are ever seeking the opportunity to see this form which is so dear.
Nityam darshanakanshinaha. Nitya means always, eternally.
Darshanakanshinaha. They always aspire to see this form.
Brahma, Lord Shiva and all other devatas, they also aspire to see this form.
Other Narayan form is visible.
Whenever there is any difficulty, the devatas approach the Dhruvaloka.
In between the Dhruvaloka, there is Shwetadvipa, an island.
So there only liberated personalities can stay, even in this material world.
So devatas are not liberated personalities.
They are people like us, just like ordinary people can become ministers for five years.
Similarly, living entity becomes devata for a time, for some time,
as long as they have the punya with them.
And when the effect of punya is gone,
they come down on this earthly planet and again they begin their activities.
Just like people, when they lose ministership, again they have to work hard for it.
So these devatas, when they are in difficulty, they go to Sheersagar
and they offer a very specific prayer, which is called Purushukta,
which is mentioned in the Vedas.
So these prayers, when they offer, sometimes they are able to see Lord Narayan.
Sometimes they are able to see just the lotus feet.
Sometimes they just hear the voice.
Sometimes there is no response at all.
So 5000 years ago, it is mentioned in Bhagavatam, when devatas went,
when the demons were overburdening the earth
and disrupting the management which Krishna wishes to have in this world.
So devatas offered this prayer, but there was no response.
And then the topmost devata, Lord Brahma, he sat in meditation.
He, being pure devotee, can establish connection with Lord Narayan personally.
And then he told, don't worry, he's going to come, he's going to incarnate.
So devatas can go to Lord Narayan, but devatas cannot see, can never approach Lord Krishna.
Oh, how do we understand this?
They can approach Narayan, they cannot approach Krishna.
What is the difference between Krishna and Narayan?
Yes, all this we will understand today.
But here Krishna is telling, this two-handed form, human-like form,
it is very, very rare to be seen even by the devatas.
The form which you are seeing with your transcendental eyes cannot be understood simply by studying the Vedas,
nor by undergoing serious penances, nor by charity, nor by worship.
So Krishna, Narayan is difficult to be comprehended by the Vedas,
cannot be approached by penance, charity.
God personally, if you have to approach him, you have to worship him, engage in devotional service.
But here a very unique word is used in this shloka.
Actually, it is so nice.
So we have to be very, very careful.
Prabhupada does very deeply have to read the Vedas.
So here it is mentioned, nor by worship.
Then what else is left?
Even by worship, we cannot see this form.
This is understood because God is a person by doing what is tapasya.
Tapasya means I do not want to enjoy in this material world.
That is good.
A person recognizes this body I have not created, these resources I have not created.
So all these resources belong to Krishna.
So I should not try to use this for my enjoyment.
I should use it for Krishna's purpose.
So such people, the self-realized souls, the sages, they do tapasya.
So any wise man understands indulging in sense enjoyment only makes me more addicted
and increases dissatisfaction in my life.
Those people who are very rich and famous celebrities, they very easily they come in depression
because they have all the name, fame, sense, enjoyment.
And the more you enjoy the senses, the more depressed you become.
This is the law of sense enjoyment.
So they do tapasya.
But simply not doing theft has never helped a person to gain any positive position in society.
If you are not stealing, that is good.
But if you are not stealing, you cannot become a powerful minister, bureaucrat, king or like that.
You need to have positive qualifications.
So if a person is not enjoying unlimitedly the senses,
such people, they are called tapasvis, that is good.
They will not be punished by the laws of nature and they will remain peaceful and calm.
But positive knowledge of reality they cannot attain simply by tapasya.
God cannot be seen by tapasya.
Simply if you are not stealing, you cannot meet prime minister.
For that you have to render valuable service.
Either you become a top officer, secretary or very important associate.
Then you can meet the prime minister if you are rendering important service to the prime minister.
So by doing charity, tapasya, this is all meant to establish us in our constitutional position.
To make us realize, please do not steal.
This money does not belong to you.
So that is why even though a person could be king in Vedic culture, he would leave his entire property.
And then he would go to jungle. Do charity.
Understand it does not belong to you.
Tapasya, do tapasya.
You should not live a life of sense enjoyment.
Read the Vedas, understand what is truth of life.
So then after doing all these things, when a person is not being harassed by laws of nature, mind is peaceful.
Then if he reads Vedas, he can understand that what is fact.
Oh, God is supreme.
Then I should worship God.
When I please him by worship, then he reveals himself.
Somehow, if you are able to please, if you worship a very powerful personality, then they may reveal themselves.
But here, Krishna is telling, no, even by worship, this form cannot be seen.
It is not by these means one can see me as I am.
Yatha means as I am.
You can see me in other forms by worship.
Thus, it means by worshiping very nicely in the temple, previous form can be seen, 400 form.
But this 200 form cannot be seen even by worship.
Yatha, Yatha means as it is.
That is why Bhagavad Gita, the Hindi version is Yatha Roop as it is.
Not any twisted interpretation.
So Krishna is now telling very clearly we can understand from this word Yatha.
First of all, Krishna has told this form is more confidential than other forms, universal or 400 form.
And Krishna is telling it is Suddhurdarsham, it is most difficult to be seen.
Nityam, Kankshita, Deva, Devas are also eternally hankering to see this form.
And Asimam, Yatha, as it is, if you want to see my original form, it cannot be seen even by worship.
Why it cannot be seen even by worship?
Because Krishna, the original person, the only qualification that we can have to see Krishna is not by offering anything to Krishna.
Because everything belongs to Krishna, what can we offer him?
All the property, all the intelligence, all the skills, they are all coming from Krishna only.
So what offering we can do to Krishna?
Krishna, there is no lack of servants for him.
So it is very difficult to understand Krishna or see him by offering any of these things which are but coming from him.
So what Krishna can have by which he becomes pleased, and that is unconditional love.
So there are two kinds of love.
If a person has to see God, just like in this world also, if you have to have an intimate relation,
want to see a person regularly every day or even once, you need to have some kind of relationship with that person.
So supreme personality, if you have to deal with him, he has got no worry, no botheration.
He has got many, many officers appointed already.
So if a person has to see, any official dealings cannot help.
A person can attract God, God can manifest himself simply if he sees this person is in tremendous love with me and he wants to engage in my loving service.
So we produce children because we want love for them alone.
There is no pleasure in life.
Similarly, this tendency is coming in us because we are unsure of God.
Our source has already these feelings.
So we are coming from God.
It is very simple to understand because God also has these feelings.
He wants love from his children.
So when we want to engage in loving service with God, then only by love, God can be seen in the end of Bhagavad Gita.
Krishna tells bhakti amam abhijanati.
And in the beginning, Krishna told Arjuna, why this knowledge you are knowing?
Because bhaktu aseeme sakha chaiti rahasyam heta duttamam.
You are my devotee.
How you are my devotee?
As a friend, you express your loving emotions towards me.
So that is why I am revealing this confidential knowledge of Bhagavad Gita to you.
All the secrets about truth I will reveal to you because you are bhakta.
You are my devotee.
You love me.
So there are two kinds of love.
One kind of love is love in opulence.
So why we love various people, celebrities or some other powerful personalities because we are enamored by their opulences.
Oh, this person has got such such fame.
I am also his or her fan.
Or this person has got such ability.
What a stroke he makes force and success.
He hits so easily.
I am fan of the I love this person, love this cricketer or any sportsman for that matter.
Oh, he or she dances so nicely.
I love this person or this person is so rich.
The rich people also attract many people.
So there was a movie which I had seen a long back.
And in this movie, there was this girl who was very, very rich and she was having an assistant.
So she exchanges the roles.
She tells you behave as a proprietor of this huge house and all the properties and I will behave as your assistant as your secretary or servant.
So I don't want I want love in my life, but I want that a person should love me because of myself, not because of the external opulence and wealth which I am having, which is the basis of relationships usually that are there in this world.
And then they exchange the roles and then the person actually he wanted to have all the opulence and become rich.
And thus the story goes on like that.
And finally, they realize that it is vice versa, that actually the assistant is master proprietor and so-called proprietor was actually assistant.
They had reversed the rules.
So nobody likes that.
These people are running around me.
Then they understand these people.
They want something for me.
That is why they are hanging around me.
So that's it is told by Lord Krishna in Chaitanya Charita Amrita that I am not pleased by this worship in opulence.
So many devotees, they worship Lord Narayan.
Lord Narayan shows his opulence, see four arms, not two arms like human being.
I have four arms.
Nobody can display four arms.
And then I have see this my huge form and all the planets in the universe, all the devatas, they are surrendering unto me.
They are under my control.
Universes are coming out of my body.
When this amazing opulence anybody sees, he surrenders immediately.
But this kind of worship does not satisfy Krishna.
So if a person has to approach the supreme personality, then he cannot do just worship.
Worship is done in reverence.
So Krishna is not pleased by worship.
Krishna is pleased by spontaneous devotional service.
When a person does not know that Krishna is God, still they are so much attracted by finishing all these Vedic studies, tapasya, they develop love of God initially because of opulences.
And by practicing this devotional service, there is a platform on which they are spontaneously attracted.
Just like here in material world, we can see a person may enter into relationship because of some external features.
But then down the line, there is attachment.
Although this also does not last.
Everything is there for a while in material world.
But this happens initially.
You may get attracted because of opulence, but then it becomes spontaneous in a similar fashion.
When a devotee reaches such extraordinary platform, I want to worship Krishna just because I want to engage in worship of Krishna.
I want to serve him.
I want to devote all my time to him for no reason, just because I'm attracted towards him.
This is called spontaneous love.
And on such platform, they forget that Krishna is supreme personality.
Still, they just want to serve Krishna.
They're always thinking about Krishna on such an exalted platform where spontaneously, just like the Acharyas are praying, Krishna, when will that stage come?
Just like a young man is attracted to a young woman, when will that stage come that similar affection or attraction I can develop for your lordship?
Only on such platform, Krishna reveals himself and Krishna can be seen.
So thus, Arjuna was not dealing with Krishna in the mood that he's supreme personality.
Thus, we saw in the previous class how Arjuna is begging pardon.
Krishna, I have called you Keshav, Madhav, Yadav.
We have played and sometimes I called you by all these names in front of others.
I made fun of you.
We slept on the same bed and please excuse me for all these offenses.
I did not realize this form.
So Krishna makes them forget.
As soon as Yashoda realizes all the universes are there within Krishna, Krishna makes her forget all these things because that disturbs devotees' natural affection for Krishna.
So thus, it is so clear in these verses,
not even by worship.
When you surpass the stage of worship also and spontaneously you want to serve Krishna on that platform, Krishna reveals his original form.
So thus here, Lord Krishna has proved that this two-handed form is supreme form of mind and all other forms are but emanations from this original two-handed form of supreme personality of mind.
However, some questions can come in our mind.
Krishna appeared 5000 years ago and Lord Narayan is there in the beginning.
So how do we understand that Krishna is supreme?
Where was Krishna before?
How Krishna's form can be original?
He appeared just 5000 years ago and is it mentioned in the Vedas somewhere?
How do we understand all these things?
To have a concrete understanding about this fact, it is very, very important to see some more references also.
So some such references we will see now in this keynote.
So you see this thing, this is very famous image.
So can you please share in the chat box what you see on the screen now here?
Let me know how many people are aware of this image.
Okay, one Mata Ji has told, Shilpa Mata Ji very nicely.
Dharanish also has told.
Some people, other people do not know.
They are telling old woman.
Some people are telling a man is worrying.
Some devotees are telling young girl.
One is telling old, another is telling young.
How is it possible?
Somebody is telling lady, a girl, woman is looking at words.
Okay, young girl, young girl, young child.
Okay, what else?
One prince is here.
Woman with head bent sidewards.
Sidewards, yes.
Young girl with a hat.
No, there is old girl here.
Old woman.
So this is optical illusion.
So watch carefully.
You will watch an old woman here.
So as some of you predicted nicely.
Actually, it is young girl and old woman at the same time.
So those who are not able to see old woman, you can please ask other devotees.
Where is the old woman in this picture?
So there is old woman and there is young lady also.
Both are present simultaneously.
So what we want to understand from this instance is this is the famous term in marketing.
They tell perception is reality.
So that is why those people who do marketing, just like one devotee came to us in our temple.
One of the servant leaders of Bhakti Vraksha group, he brought him.
And this person was not believer of God.
But he was very enthusiastic in distributing passes for our weekend workshops.
So I asked why he was distributing passes if he was not a believer.
So he told, no, Prabhu, he wanted to test his marketing skills.
Even though I do not believe, but how good is my marketing that a false thing also I can say very nicely.
So they tell perception is reality.
Actually, nobody knows reality.
And that is fact.
Perception is only reality, as we have discussed many times before.
For a sick man, odd food is bitter.
For a colorblind person, perception of colors is different.
Similarly, in the marketing world, they want to create a perception and they make people buy it either by some attraction or by creating some fear or by urgent necessity.
They create a perception that this thing is very important for you.
This is reality.
And although it is a fact that current perception is that Lord Vishnu incarnates as Krishna and not vice versa, which we have seen fact in the form of Bhagavad Gita.
But nobody is able to analyze Bhagavad Gita so nicely because they don't take the knowledge in the Guru Shishya Parampara on your own.
If you read, you will miss these small words and these shlokas, which are there in between.
So the general perception is that Lord Vishnu incarnates as Lord Krishna.
However, we have to understand perception is not reality.
An example, just like there was this perception for many decades, around 30 years, that this refined oil is very good for health and clarified butter or ghee is causing you heart attacks.
But now they are telling actually refined oil is causing heart attacks.
And this ghee is very, very nice.
But these companies, they established this artificial necessity and some research work were published that it is so important by huge propaganda.
Ghee went out of picture.
People became so sick because of lack of ghee.
This is very important.
And now all the famous dietitians, all the celebrities who want to maintain a trim fit body, they are all consuming ghee very nicely.
Now, the son of Mukesh Ambani, he lost so much of his weight by eating ghee, so much of ghee.
So now they are telling this ghee, of course, if taken from right source, is very good for health.
But perception for 20, 30 years was other way round.
That is harmful.
And something which is harmful was taken as good.
So does the perception changes.
We should never chase and go after perceptions.
Similar is the matter with the world religions.
So so many religions are there in the world and they were not existing.
Somebody who was having a deep impact on this planet, they were so very much convinced they were able to transfer their conviction to other people.
Karl Marx, Lenin, they were convinced this communism, it can make people very, very happy.
And thus they converted two huge countries into communist countries.
They were so very much thoroughly convinced.
Similarly, another person was convinced with other ideology.
So thus there came Lord Buddha.
He preached one thing and people became Buddhist.
They lost faith on the Vedas.
And then came Sripashankaracharya.
He established monism, another philosophy, and people became this thing.
They left Buddhism. Buddhism went out of India.
And then different Vaishnavacharya came.
They converted again.
They again changed the faith of people.
And before this, faith was different.
So like this, faith is always changing and evolving.
The most practiced faith, practiced or not, at least affiliated Christianity, almost one third of the population follows.
It was not existing 2000 years ago.
And now majority of the world population, they believe in the word of Christ and kingdom of God and all such things.
But and many people, other people, the followers of Islam, such faith also was not existing.
But now it has got a very large following.
So the faith changes.
Just two generations ago, Vedas were fact.
They were the books of history and the books of reference.
And Vedvakya, whatever is mentioned in the Vedas, was supposed to be taken as final verdict.
And now when Gurukul system was taken away and Vedas were coined disparagingly,
not right and very, very illusory word was coined.
That is called mythology.
And now people think it is myth, something fictional, something thought of in the mind.
But this was fact.
The most advanced, the most wise man, Chanakya Pandit, strong follower of the Vedas.
He's quoting Vedas, Lord Krishna, all these Puranas in many, many places, citing these histories.
That how this Yadavansha got annihilated.
You should not commit the same mistake like that.
So people were taking Vedas as fact, as reference books.
But now it is being taken as mythology.
Although that perception is changing now that people are wise.
The people are taking more interest in the Vedas and now they understand how it is fact.
Ayurveda, yoga, metallurgy and so many other sciences.
People are quantum physics, all those people we saw in the mantra yoga workshop.
How they all were great followers of the Vedas.
Schrodinger, Heisenberg and Bohr, Tesla, all of them.
However, it should not make us lazy that OK, these faiths are there.
So everything is all right.
Atheist is also right.
Theist is also right.
There is something which is called absolute truth.
Some people can take that Narayan is incarnation of Krishna.
Some people can tell Krishna is incarnation of Narayan.
However, one should not become lazy that thinking OK, everything is all right.
So we have to understand what is fact.
So actually life is very, very simple.
We need to understand who is God.
God means origin of everything.
Who is supreme controller.
Everything is under his control.
And simply try to follow his instructions and have a relationship with him.
If the supreme power loves you, have a relationship with you.
And you follow everything what he tells.
What in the world can disturb us?
So thus Srila Prabhupada tells you make a practical experiment in your life.
You need not struggle so much.
Just practice chanting this Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
And then you will see in your life how you're not having any difficulty, how you're always having a blissful state.
So these rules and regulations are very simple.
Just try.
You have surrendered yourself to so many other philosophers.
Now please try to surrender to Krishna.
Follow the simple basic instructions, the lifestyle which he has recommended in the Bhagavad Gita.
And then you see you're always blissful.
So we are not blissful because we are violating some laws of nature.
As soon as we agree that OK, today onwards I will follow the way God tells me to live.
Immediately we become happy.
Immediately we don't have to wait for a couple of months or like that.
As soon as we surrender, we become blissful.
So we should not think that OK, so many face people are having everything is all right.
If something is contradictory, then we have to understand what is reality.
So it is told in Chaitanya Charita Amrita in understanding Siddhanta, truth, principles, one should not be lazy.
So what is fact? What is truth?
So we also discussed in our basic foundation workshops.
So to understand Vedas, we can never use our senses because our senses give us perception of reality.
Reality may be quite different.
Just like Arjuna is able to see this universal form, others are not able to see.
So sick man cannot tell what is real taste of food.
Colorblind person, so many examples.
Moth is thinking this fire is very good for me.
So using our brain, our intelligence, we cannot tell what is good and what is bad for me.
Thus, depression, distress is increasing in the world despite so many research papers being published every day.
So many universities being erected, so many funds being invested every day.
Why despite all this research work, depression and distress is increasing in the society?
More so in those universities.
Any person who goes to Gurukuli studies Vedas very nicely, he is given title of Brahmana.
Brahmabhuta prasannatma is always happy.
This is the first symptom of a man of knowledge that he will always be happy.
And what is this education in Massachusetts Institute of Technology?
It has got the maximum depression rate and so many suicides.
So what is this?
The temple of knowledge of today.
It is having maximum stress.
What knowledge you are giving?
Knowledge means which liberates you, which takes you out of all conditioning.
You should always be happy.
Knowledge is meant to make you happy.
And in temple of knowledge, you are in stress.
What is this knowledge you are cultivating?
That means we are cultivating ignorance in the name of knowledge.
So that is why using our senses, experiments like moths, we can think this thing is good for me.
We will jump into fire, increase depression and death in our life, or we can have perception of a sick man or a colorblind person.
That is why in order to understand what is reality, we have to go beyond perceptions, beyond the faiths which are changing in the world, beyond this timeline of changing faith.
And we have to take help of the Vedic literatures, which are words of God.
If you have doubt how Vedic literatures are word of God, we request you to attend some of our foundation workshops or we have the recordings in our podcast as well.
You can please search incredible Vedas and then you can go through it.
You will have very clear understanding.
So that is why to understand reality, we have to see Vedic literatures.
So that is what we are going to refer now to get more solid faith, although in Bhagavad Gita it has been made very clear.
Still to have further, very, very diamond solid understanding.
First of all, let us see Shrimad Bhagavatam. Shrimad Bhagavatam is the crux of all the Vedas.
What does it mention?
So many people ask that, Prabhu, if Krishna came 5000 years ago, how do we understand Krishna is eternal?
We can understand from Bhagavatam.
So in Shrimad Bhagavatam, 9th canto, Bhagavatam has got 12 cantos, there is description of a king of Satyuga.
Satyuga is before Dwaparyuga.
This is Kalyuga, before this is Dwaparyuga, before that was Treta Yuga, before that is Satyuga,
lakhs of years ago, before Krishna's advent, was a king by the name Maharaj Amrish.
And what was Maharaj Amrish doing? It is described very nicely in this verse you can see on the screen.
The mind of Maharaj Amrish was absorbed in Krishna Padar Vindayur.
Maharaj Amrish always engaged in mind in meditating upon the lotus feet of Krishna,
his words in describing the glories of the Lord, his hands in cleansing the Lord's temple.
So temples were there in Satyuga also. Some people tell temple worship, anthropomorphism, all these things started recently.
We have created these forms in Satyuga. It is told here this temple worship was being performed.
His hands, Karau, Hare, Mandir, Marjanadish, you see the word Mandir which is being mentioned here even for Satyuga.
So people don't read the Vedas. So I request all of you please read and spread this knowledge.
So people have become so-called spiritual teachers without reading Vedas and they claim also that I don't read Bhagavad Gita.
And sir why you are teaching any spiritual knowledge then if you don't read Vedas?
Hare, Mandir, Marjanadish, Mandir was there in Satyuga and hands of king were used in cleaning the temple of Lord.
Shrutim Chakara Achyut Satkathodaye, years in hearing the words spoken by Krishna and Achyut Satkathodaye,
words were describing the activities of Krishna. So mind is absorbed in Krishna Padar Vindayur,
not Vishnu Padar Vindayur, Narayan Padar Vindayur. Krishna word is used here, Krishna's lotus feet.
So how come in Satyuga Maharaj Amrish is knowing that after so many lakhs of years Krishna will come?
So because Krishna's form is eternal. How it is eternal? I will explain in the coming verses.
We will see the reference. So we can see that knowledge of Krishna was existing even before Krishna's appearance 5000 years ago.
So it is not a fact that Krishna appeared only 5000 years ago. That particular form Lord Narayan took only 5000 years ago.
Before this nobody was knowing Krishna. How you can tell Krishna is source? No.
Krishna was famous, Krishna was knowing and being worshipped even lakhs of years before Krishna appeared.
Similarly Prahlad Maharaj, he also was existing in, he appeared in Satyuga.
The first demons of the universe. In 7th canto of Bhagavatam it is being mentioned.
So Prahlad Maharaj is again using the word here, Matirna Krishna.
So his father asked that who has given you this knowledge, how you have got this Krishna consciousness, this knowledge, this consciousness.
So Prahlad Maharaj uses the word for his consciousness, Krishnamati, Krishna consciousness.
He is not telling Narayan consciousness, he is not telling Vishnu consciousness.
He is telling Matirna Krishna. So my dear father, this Krishnamati, Krishna consciousness cannot be attained by hearing lectures or by one's individual endeavour or by other person's help.
Those who are attached to material sense enjoyment, they can never have Krishna consciousness.
And thus they can never enjoy that unlimited bliss which a person derives by having constant meditation upon Krishna.
So the word again Krishnamati is being used here.
How Prahlad Maharaj is knowing that after 5000 years Krishna is coming and he is thinking about Krishna.
So Krishna was always known even before his appearance. Krishna is always existing.
He appears 5000 years ago in that particular time in Dwaparyoga and then he disappears.
He does not take birth and die like us. Appears and disappears.
But Krishna is always famous even though when he is not visible.
The description of his form is given in the Vedas and pure devotees meditate.
Just like Prahlad Maharaj is telling, I am absorbed in Krishnamati, Krishna consciousness.
So in Shrimad Bhagavatam, first canto, the description of Lord Narayan and various forms are given as you can see on the screen.
All these incarnations, there are unlimited incarnations of Krishna.
So all these incarnations starting with you see Vishnu forms lying just under Krishna.
Krishna is standing and then Vishnu forms are there.
So three Vishnu forms you can see. Mahavishnu, Garbhadakshay Vishnu, Kshirodakshay Vishnu.
So these are Purushavataras, the first incarnations in this material existence.
And then there is Varahavatar, Masyavatara, Parashuram, Nar Narayan, Prithu Maharaj, Lord Kapila, Rishabhdev, Dhanvantari and Vaman Dev, Narsinghdev, Lord Ram, Chandra, Kalki Avatar.
All these expansions are there. But all these forms it is being mentioned.
So very nicely Vedavyaas explains about different incarnations and Krishna's description is also there.
But Vedavyaas concludes this thing by this very very important verse.
All the Vedas are given to us. Ordinary people have seen neither Krishna nor Narayan nor other Devi Devatas.
We know about Durga, Ganesha, Shiva, all the other demigods just by the Vedic reference.
So that is why and all the Vedas are coming from Vedavyaas.
So Vedavyaas's verdict is final and moreover Bhagavatam which is final composition of Vedavyaas, final work of Vedavyaas.
So after describing all these incarnations, Vedavyaas tells
So all these different incarnations which I have explained here, they are
Anshah means they are part of Krishna's body. Kala means part of part of Krishna's parts.
So they are either Krishna's partial expansions or expansions of the expansion which is called Kala.
Krishna please don't consider himself also an incarnation.
Krishna is not Avatar, he is Avatari. He is source of all the incarnations.
These are Anshah or these are further expansions or parts of the Anshahs.
Tu means but Krishna Bhagawan Swam, but Krishna is Swam Bhagawan.
He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the source of all the incarnations.
So thus Vedavyaas, the topmost authority of the Vedas, he has given this verdict after describing all the incarnations.
Further, a very important literature, Vedas in this material universe have come to us by Lord Brahma.
And Brahma has given a literature which is called Brahma Samhita which gives the topmost conclusion of all the Vedic knowledge
because Brahma himself gave this Vedas to us so nobody knows Vedas better than Lord Brahma.
The same Vedas were compiled in written format by Vedavyaas which Lord Brahma imparted to everybody in this universe.
So what is the reference from Brahma Samhita?
So here it is being told,
The personal abode or the planet where Supreme Personality you can see on the screen, on the top is Goloka Vrindavan.
So the name of that place is Goloka, Nij Dham, where Krishna lives personally.
Below that is Devi Mahesh Hari Dham Asu Teshu. There are abodes of Devi, Durga.
This material world is called Devi Dham. Durga is in charge.
That is why sometimes Durga is mentioned as supreme authority.
She is supreme authority of material existence which is having unlimited universes.
So Devi Dham is there and above Devi Dham is Mahesh Dham.
In Mahesh Dham also there are two partitions. One is Mahakaal that is completely dark.
Another is Sadashiv's place that is completely full of light. That is Mahesh Dham.
And then Hari Dham Asu Teshu Teshu. Before that Sadashiv's place there is Hari Dham.
Hari means Lord Vishnu. But all these Dham whether of Lord Hari, Lord Vishnu or Mahesh or Devi they are below Goloka Dham.
Govinda Maadi Purusham Swai worships that top most person whose name is Govinda
who expands as Hari, Mahesh and Devi and like that.
And then again Lord Brahma mentions. What is the difference between?
So this picture which you are seeing on the screen is Brahma Vimohana Leela.
When Brahma was not able to understand so Krishna's form is very very rare.
And Brahma who is son of Lord Vishnu, he also was not able to understand that how Krishna is Supreme Lord.
He also got confused. So then when Lord Brahma realized by mercy of Krishna,
Krishna showed all these unlimited Vishnu forms expanding from his body.
They only were present as all the friends of Krishna which were stolen by Brahma.
So Lord Brahma tells.
Just like Deepa, there is an earthen lamp. From that lamp you can produce many many lamps.
And all those lamps, other ignited lamps will have the same illumination.
From one candle, many candles can be lit.
All those candles will have equal effulgence but still there is one original candle.
In this way, Krishna and Vishnu, there is no difference.
Same person is there. Just like sometimes we wish to be there with our family
and we enjoy a different relationship with our friends.
We enjoy different happiness when people respect us in our office or workplace.
And we enjoy like this. We have different different pleasures.
We enjoy different pleasure in playing sports.
But we can do one activity at a time.
But God permanently expands himself in all these forms.
When he wants to enjoy the majestic opulence, some people want to worship in that form.
He expands permanently as Narayan.
Another form as a king, Lord Ramachandra.
Another form as...
Sometimes he wants to enjoy deep dive in the ocean, so Matsya avatar.
So like this, in order to enjoy the different pastimes,
Krishna permanently expands himself in all these forms.
However, there is one original form also of Krishna beyond all these forms.
So although there is no difference between all these forms,
Krishna, Vishnu, they are same person. They are equally powerful.
But still, it is being explained here by Lord Brahma.
Although these candles are having same illumination, still there is one original candle.
And that original candle is, that original person is Govinda Maadi Purusham Tamaham Bhajami.
Govinda and Adi Purusham, the original person Tamaham Bhajami.
I worship that original person.
Vishnu Taya Vibhati, Vishnu Taya, who expands himself in many many unlimited Vishnu forms.
So that's very clear comparison is given here.
Between Govinda's, Krishna's form and Vishnu's form.
Then it is being told here, the first expansion, there are three Vishnus in this material existence.
What you see on the screen now is Lord Mahavishnu.
You can see from every pore hole of his body, skin hole of his body,
bubbles are coming out and every bubble is a universe.
I'm sorry, I'm taking some more time because this is little important topic.
Please give me five more minutes. I will wind up.
So all these bubbles are coming out and every bubble is a universe.
So we are very tiny small living entities.
We cannot comprehend what is going on in the world.
But the Vedic literature give us the description.
The time duration of exhalation is the entire lifespan of Brahma.
Brahma has life of approximately 330 trillion years of earthly planet.
Can you imagine? 330 trillion years. What is that?
And that is just exhalation period of Mahavishnu.
Brahma dies in that time.
And that Mahavishnu,
So this Mahavishnu, Vishnu Mahan, this Kala word we used,
we saw in Bhagavatam also.
Here same word is being used.
He is Kala. He is expansion of expansion of expansion of expansion of Krishna.
Govinda maadhi purusham. But I worship that original person Govinda.
Tamaham bhajami.
So that we can see Govinda standing in Goloka Vrindavan Dham.
And he is expanding himself as Vishnur Mahan, Mahavishnu.
Mahavishnu is his expansion of expansion of expansion.
So although there is no difference between Mahavishnu and Krishna,
same personality but still Lord Mahavishnu comes from Govinda, Lord Sri Krishna.
So this is the verdict of Brahma Samhita.
So somebody can tell you Brahma Samhita, you just follow.
No, it is not just literature of Hare Krishna movement or ISKCON.
And not just the literature of even Gaudiya Vaishnavism.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu when he was touring South India, this literature is very famous.
Lord Brahma Samhita.
But because such printing press was not there, copies were very rare.
And in between copies were difficult to find.
But people were knowing Brahma Samhita is there.
So when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was touring South India 500 years ago,
in Adi Kesava temple, the temple is still there in the south.
Maybe we can take you on a trip sometimes.
So in that temple he saw the Brahmanas there chanting the verses of Brahma Samhita.
So Chaitanya Mahaprabhu immediately got it copied, this Brahma Samhita from there.
And thus he distributed and thus we following Chaitanya Mahaprabhu have got only one chapter is available.
Other chapters are still not available.
But however, something was retrieved.
So this Brahma Samhita, it is not that we have not heard much about it.
So again, I am telling, popularity does not mean reality.
Just like ordinary maths could be very popular.
1 plus 1 is 2, 2 to the 4.
The time table could be very popular.
However, some books of mathematics, Newton-Leibniz theorem and such higher mathematics could be found in graduate or postgraduate study of mathematics.
Some are very, very rare.
Those who are postgraduate students, statistical institute, some other places you would be studying multidimensional mathematics and like that.
Those books would be very, very rare, difficult to find in the market.
It does not mean that that is lower or less important.
Rather, the thing which is most important, it is very rare and difficult to be find.
Thus, it is a fact that description of Vishnu is rare in the Vedas because people are mainly interested in attaining material benefits.
So Devi Devata worship is very widely recommended in the Vedas.
Worship of Vishnu is less mentioned.
So that is why Krishna tells Arjuna to reject Vedas because they mainly talk about material enjoyment, material affairs.
And further, even though Lord Vishnu Narayan is mentioned, Krishna is very, very rare to be found in the Vedas because he is confidential.
It does not mean that just like higher mathematics, very less books are there.
That theorem you will not find and simple mathematics algebra trigonometry will find in so many books because everyone has to study that.
But higher mathematics, higher theorems, it is very, very rare to be found.
But rarity does not mean it is less important.
So similarly, Brahmasamhita is rare.
Not many people know, but still authorize people, Vedic authorities.
They accept this across the world.
So thus, these are the references of Brahmasamhita accepted by personally Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, who is incarnation of Krishna.
And then Sri Dashavatar Stotra.
So everyone knows this Dasavatar and falsely they think Krishna has only ten incarnations.
No, this poem got so famous of Dasavatar, people started thinking Krishna has got only Dashavatar or ten incarnations.
But that is not fact.
This poetry called Dasavatar, composed by Sri Jayadeva Goswami, it specifically mentions about ten incarnations.
So people thought Krishna has only ten incarnations.
No. So in Dasavatar Stotra also, if you read, it is always mentioned.
Keshavdhrita Narhari Rupa, Keshavdhrita Vamanarupa, Keshavdhrita Keshav.
Krishna has taken all these forms.
This is the last verse which I'm showing here.
Vedaan uddharate jaganthivihate bhugolam uddhibhrate.
Dayatyam darayate balim chalayante kshatrakshayam kurvate.
Paulasthyam jayate halam kalayate karunyam atanvate.
Mlechhaan murchayate.
Dashakriti krite krishnayatubhyam namaha.
Dashakriti krite, these ten forms, ten akritis, ten forms, you have taken Krishna.
Krishnayatubhyam namaha.
I worship you, Krishna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
I offer my respects, Krishnaya.
So Krishna has taken all these forms.
This is a verdict of Jayadeva Goswami.
Jayadeva Goswami came much before Lord Chaitanya.
Lord Chaitanya personally was reading his prayers.
So this is from Geet Govinda.
So thus all the Vedic literatures, they mention this in Chaitanya Charitamrit also.
There is description when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu went on South Indian tour.
He was talking to Venkat Bhatta, pure devotee of Lakshmi Narayan.
So he was asking, who is supreme?
Krishna is supreme or Vishnu? What is the original form?
So it was no difference. Both are same.
So then Chaitanya Mahaprabhu asked, he is Krishna himself out of his great compassion.
He wanted to explain this confidential secret.
He told then why Goddess Lakshmi, she wants to take part in Ras Leela.
That is the description in the Vedas.
That Lakshmi is willing to participate in Ras Leela.
So Lakshmi is most chaste.
Why Lakshmi would go to another man?
Chaste lady never leaves the husband.
So then Venkat Bhatta tells, there is no difference.
Narayan and Krishna, they are the same personalities.
So her chastity is not disturbed by approaching Krishna.
Then Chaitanya Mahaprabhu asks,
So if that is the case, Krishna and Narayan are just the same personality,
why Krishna, in this Krishna's Ras Leela, Lakshmi was not given entrance?
So then Venkat Bhatta told, I do not know this answer.
So then it was explained very nicely by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.
That how those devotees who are worshipping Krishna, worshipping Narayan in opulence,
they have to give up all those opulences.
So Lakshmi could not give up her opulent position.
And thus she was denied an entrance in this most confidential pastime of Krishna, which is called Ras Leela.
Thus it is told in the Adi Purana,
So nobody is dearer to me.
Even Brahma and Rudra, Lord Shiva, they are the topmost Vaishnavas of this material world.
But
So here it is being told by Krishna, even Lakshmi is not so as dear to me.
As are the gopis of Vrindavan.
The gopis leave all the opulences, they live as simply cowherd women of Vrindavan.
They don't have knowledge of even opulences of Krishna, still they are so much attracted to Krishna.
So in this way, when a person is willing to give all the opulences, adopt a very simple life,
have spontaneous love for Krishna, Krishna is revealed.
So thus in Adi Purana also it is mentioned that
Lord Shiva, they also cannot take this position.
And in the Shruti Shastras, some people will tell, no, please quote me from the original four Vedas.
There is no difference, four Vedas, Puranas, Bhagavatam, whatever we have seen, everything is authority.
But some people who are not having proper knowledge, they ask for reference from the four Vedic literature,
Srigi, Ajusam, Atharved. So there are descriptions there also.
In Atharved, Gopala Tapani Upanishad,
It was Krishna, Smakrishna, Krishna, who in the beginning instructed Brahma in Vedic knowledge
and who disseminated Vedic knowledge in the past.
So not Lord Narayana, Krishna disseminated this knowledge, Gopayati Smakrishna,
who Brahmanam gave this knowledge to Brahma, he was Krishna.
It is mentioned in Atharved, Gopala Tapani Upanishad.
Then Narayana Upanishad mentions,
And of course, we have seen the reference from the Bhagavad Gita also.
So thus the references are unlimited because of paucity of time,
although it is very, very confidential.
But among the lakhs of shlokas of the Vedas, there are ample evidences.
If somebody wants to understand through the mercy of these pure devotees,
we can read and go through very nice direct explanation and the purports of all these shlokas.
So thus I think it is sufficiently clear for you.
There is no difference between Vishnu and Narayana, Varaha, Matsya incarnations,
Krishna in order to favour devotees who want to worship particular forms,
give those rasas, Krishna expands permanently in all these forms.
However, as Lord Narayana, a person can enjoy only dasa rasa,
the pleasure of serving Krishna in servitude or shanta rasa,
pleasure in passive state, just like the trees.
The trees are also living entities, but they are actively not engaged in service.
They are very pleased when Lord Krishna comes and sits under a tree.
So either shanta rasa, passive enjoyment or dasa rasa, enjoyment as a servitor.
These moods can be enjoyed with Lord Narayana.
However, higher rasas, the enjoyment of friendship, intimate friendship
or that of parenthood, you can control God
or that of conjugal love, which gopis are enjoying with Krishna.
This is accessible only to the devotees of Krishna and Balram, these two forms,
not in any other form.
So those devotees who wish to relish this higher confidential pleasures
and which actually give Krishna more pleasure,
they worship Krishna, personally the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
