How some people, they define the experience of this world as happiness and others, they define the experience of this world as distress.
We work hard to become more happy, increase our happiness, and we work hard to mitigate the distress. These are the two objectives of all human endeavor.
But the Shastras give a very nice example, and Shri Lapa Upad gives this very nice striking analogy.
That sometimes when a person, you know, in the farm fields, you'll find stool.
And sometimes a person, you know, you hate or dislike the wet stool, and if the stool is dry, you tell, oh, this is okay.
But ultimately, stool is stool, either wet or dry. In a similar fashion in this material world, there is no question of happiness.
The same thing is called happiness. So happiness can be compared to dry stool and distress can be compared to wet stool.
Ultimately, both is stool. Fever is fever. Temperature is temperature.
Sometimes when a patient is visited by relatives or somebody, then he may tell, oh, I'm feeling very happy today. How are you? I'm fine.
So where is the question of being fine in hospital? If a person is in hospital, it means he or she is not fine.
But why a person tells I'm fine? Because the temperature has come down. It was high, say 104. Now it has come down to 100.
So definitely a person will feel good, like some of us would have faced the covid fever.
So it is very high on the first day. The entire body could be paining for many. And then second day, third day, it's great relief gradually.
For most of the people, a crude example, in a similar fashion in this material world, Rao Parthas, where is the question of happiness?
There is always fever. Whatever situation we are in, the problem of death we have to face.
So if a person has to die, there is a question of happiness. The disease have to be faced always.
A person can become how much ever rich he can attain more than what he desired.
Wealth, opulence, name, fame, but diseases he has to face.
And sometimes the diseases are so bad, especially in the old age, old age, everyone has to face.
So now most of us would be young who are hearing this session, but some of us could be old, they must be realizing.
And we also will become old and we'll realize. And we have seen how very powerful people who are powerful.
When they were in their jobs and business, but now that they have retired, they could be bureaucrats, they could be ministers, X, Y, Z.
But now nobody's caring for them. And there are so many diseases, so many problems in the body.
Sometimes they wish, how soon will I die? Nobody cares for them. They are very powerful.
And 20 people were there to receive them, escort them. Now nobody's there even to carry their luggage.
And so many things nobody cares for you. And apart from this, so many physical maladies are there.
So anybody in this world has to face diseases, death, old age and so many problems.
Every step there is problem. Now you are hearing this session, you keep on sitting straight.
After some time you need to shift your legs, your neck or like that. Otherwise it will start paining.
So relief, if you shift our legs, that can be taken as happiness that is taken as relief.
And then it could be very hot, especially in Mumbai, it's humid now.
So if somebody is able to be in an air conditioner, then that is very nice.
Then we'll feel good. So otherwise it's misery.
So air conditioned experience cannot be taken as happiness.
It is absence of misery that we are perceiving as happiness.
Then after some time we may feel hungry. Again, distress to counteract that distress, we will eat and that is taken as happiness.
And then we might have to go to some place travel. If you travel on foot, it could be quite miserable.
So we use automobile and then we feel happy, isn't it?
So this is called happiness. It is nothing but negation of distress.
Then we'll feel tired. And to counteract this misery of tiredness,
we take rest and that is perceived as happiness.
In this fashion, we have to understand every moment we are being bombarded with miseries,
adhyatmic, adhibhautic and adhidevik, created by my mind and body,
created by other living entities or by natural forces.
Just like COVID now, natural force is there.
So like this, all the miseries are there of these three varieties,
which are striking us at every single moment.
And when we are able to counteract these miseries, that is taken as happiness.
But actually, if you see, there is no happiness because these distresses are always present in everybody's life.
So if some people are able to avoid such distress to some degree, then that is perceived as happiness.
So it is compared to wet stool and dry stool. Stool is stool.
You cannot allow I've touched only dry stool. I did not touch the wet portion.
So in a similar fashion, we have to understand in this world of duality,
which we call happiness and distress, the reality is only distress.
Sometimes the distress is more, sometimes when the distress is mitigated
or one kind of distress we get relief from, that is perceived as happiness.
So the solution of this situation is that we have to understand that
the solution of this situation of duality, wet stool and dry stool,
is not by any kind of hard work, any kind of law of attraction,
any kind of writing books that I've become a millionaire and billionaire
and making any kind of business plans or future plans or family plans.
Nothing is going to work. So what works?
That is what we are going to discuss today. A very, very powerful technique.
And what is that technique? This is stated in the famous verse
which is quoted by many devotees many times.
This is a prayer of Prahlad Maharaj, which he offered to Lord Narasimhadev.
So what is this prayer? Prahlad Maharaj tells,
So Prahlad Maharaj was a small child, five year old,
but he suffered so many challenges, not just challenges,
even so many life attempts were made to kill him by his father,
the person who is supposed to protect him in the first place.
But Prahlad Maharaj was completely unaffected.
And when Lord Narasimhadev has come here personally to grant him some boon,
Prahlad Maharaj is telling, No, my dear Lord, please, I do not want anything.
Duratya means very difficult to cross. What is very difficult to cross?
Vaitharanyat means crossing a river which is known by the name Vaitharanyat
or crossing over this material world. So what is this river Vaitharanyat?
So as we understand from Google Maps these days, here there is a road
and you know they have very nice satellite imaging.
They will tell you here there is river, there is tunnel, there is bridge.
In a similar fashion, Shrimad Bhagavatam also describes the universal topography
and in the universal structure there is a river.
Those people who are sinful, so people do not understand these simple things.
There is no time to think that some people are having good bodies,
some people are having bad bodies. So what is the reason?
Why different bodies are being created? So nobody wonders.
So a person needs to have just simple logic.
If we can understand an automobile cannot come by itself.
It has come with a reason and it has been made by somebody.
If we can understand computer cannot come on its own.
Computer has to be manufactured by somebody.
No amount of millions and billions and trillions and zillions of years of evolution
also cannot produce a computer. It just cannot assemble on its own.
Then how this human brain which is much much much more powerful than a supercomputer
and consumes much much much less energy than what a supercomputer would consume
and it is amazingly more efficient also and amazingly more small also.
So such a compact supercomputer which consumes very less power,
which is very more powerful, very high in processing and storage,
how can it assemble on its own?
And this brain is just but a small part of this wonderful body
which has got so many fantastic organs.
So if we can understand computer cannot come its own,
what to speak of supercomputer or what to speak of this most amazing supercomputer
which is fitted in our brain and what to speak of this body
in which every cell is more complex than a metropolitan city.
So how it can assemble on its own?
There is no question computer cannot come in on its own.
So our body, our brain cannot come on its own even after many many years of evolution.
So this is very simple concept.
If you can just understand computer cannot come on its own,
then it is very simple to understand everything else.
Then so many bodies are being created, why they are being created,
why some bodies are born diseased and creator is equally disposed to everybody.
We are all children of creator.
As parents always love their children,
this tendency is coming from our father.
Very simple we have to understand.
If we have to have some knowledge of God,
we simply have to analyze ourselves.
Whatever propensities we have, we have got it from our source.
So God should have all these things which we are having.
Just this very simple concept we need to imbibe in our life
and then everything is self understood.
So we are having just like a drop of ocean,
it borrows the properties of the ocean,
the particulates, PPM, pH, all these things,
a drop of water will borrow from the ocean, all these properties.
So all the properties which a drop is exhibiting,
ocean must have it, the source must have it.
So whatever properties, features we are having, God must have it.
We love our children, God also loves his children.
Then why is giving some of the children bad bodies?
Because it is simple to understand.
Just like a criminal is being punished by the judge,
although he is impartial, this is his activities or her activities.
In a similar fashion, we are being given different bodies.
So people are not able to understand this simple fact.
And if from birth a person is having such unfortunate bodies,
it means in previous life you would have done some actions
so that he is subject to such miserable bodies in this life.
So we are eternal.
We do action and we receive bodies.
It is very, very clear.
So if you commit very, very abominable sin,
if I kill somebody, I will be killed.
If I kill 20 people, then what is the punishment?
You cannot kill a person more than once.
So to punish such people, so now we understood from common sense
that how behind this creation there is a creator
and this creation is happening, the bodies we are getting basis,
the actions which we are, how simple it is to understand,
where is complication?
We love our children, this property we have got from God.
God loves his children.
Still some people have unfortunate body.
It means it is their own action, their own karma.
We put others to suffering, then we have to suffer.
That is why the meat is called maamsa in Sanskrit.
Maamsa khadati iti maansa.
I am eating you, so you shall eat me in next life.
This is the meaning people don't understand.
In Sanskrit, every word has got a meaning.
Sansar has come from sansriti.
Sansriti means repeated cycle of birth and death.
It's a cycle, sansriti.
So repeated cycle of birth and death.
Sansriti, from there the word has come, sansar.
Here repeated birth and death happens.
So every word in Sanskrit has a meaning.
There is no by chance.
In English language you just give any name like that.
That also has got etymology of course,
but many times it is just by chance.
Sanskrit, it has got a deep meaning behind it, everything.
Why we are called maanav?
Because we have come from Manu.
From Manu comes maanav.
The original person from which our race has come, he is called Manu.
So everything has got a reason, specific reason, the entire etymology.
So those living entities who commit great sins,
then what would be the future?
So the future, it is told in the Garun Puran, in other Puranas,
that those living entities who are very sinful,
just like those people who commit gross crimes,
you cannot do away just with the penalty,
then they are taken to court for trials.
In a similar fashion, these very sinful activities,
if performed by the people,
such sinful people are taken to the court of Yamraj.
Yamraj is the dispenser of judgment
for all the living entities.
So before going to the planet of Yamraj,
the living entity has to cross a river and that is called Vaitharani.
And this river has got no water.
Then what it has got?
It has got blood, pus, mucus and all such filthy things
and so many insects and worms.
And the living entity has to cross this river.
So how you can cross the river, it is very difficult.
A river which is filled with pus and mucus and so dirty
and so many insects will come and bite.
And when the person is crossing, there are crocodiles
and other very dangerous species in this river also.
They will also come and bite.
And there would be different birds who will try to pluck out
skin and organs from your body.
In this way, great torment happens to a sinful living entity.
And after this, this is nothing.
And for many, many, it is a very huge river.
Nobody sees the other end.
He has to just keep on wading through
and after a very, very long time of suffering,
the person will be able to cross.
And then real punishment begins.
And so you can just imagine how horrible it is.
So God's arrangement is very, very perfect.
Nobody can go unscathed and escape like that,
doing all wrong things and thinking nobody is seeing me.
So this is called veterinary.
So Prahlad Maharaj is telling,
it is very, very fearful for people.
So some pious deeds it is mentioned,
which can save a person from veterinary,
like a person who has donated a cow
or some other charities he has done,
then he can be saved.
So that is why people do so many rituals before death
so that they can be saved from veterinary and other such things.
However, we need not follow so many other details, rituals.
If a person engages in service of Krishna,
Yamdutas flee from that person.
So this process is so nice.
Everything is taken care of.
But for general people, living entities,
they have to execute all these things
to safeguard them against such dangerous elements.
So Prahlad Maharaj is telling,
I am not afraid of this thing.
I am not at all afraid by this veterinary
or of this material existence,
which is the cause of constant anxiety and fear, dualities.
So we want to come to a state of constant bliss, constant happiness.
That is possible only when the living entity is free
from the effect of the forces of this nature, this material world.
We get forced into various desires, various actions.
We lose control.
We are disturbed.
And I feel I should not be disturbed.
Still I am getting disturbed.
So senses are very difficult to control.
Sometimes there is death.
Then I lament.
Sometimes there is some loss of name, fame, property, status
and so many other things.
Then again I lament.
And like this life is full of lamentation,
anxiety, sorrow and all these emotions.
They put us into turmoil.
How a person can remain undisturbed.
So that is why today's topic is very, very important.
So we have to take from the example of Prahlad Maharaj,
how this small boy who faced the maximum a person can face in this world,
maximum torment, maximum suffering,
he was put into,
in the open area
when,
you know, Hiran Kashyapu was,
he tried various ways, he was not able to kill.
Then he put him in the hailstorm in the open.
Nothing happened.
Then he threw from the top of the mountain cliff.
Nothing happened.
Then he threw him under the feet of an elephant.
Nothing happened.
He put him among the very deadly poisonous snakes.
Nothing happened.
Various, very dangerous weapons were thrown at him.
Nothing happened.
Poison was administered to him through his own mother.
Mother was crying.
But this father, Hiran Kashyapu, was so cruel.
He forced the mother.
He forced the mother.
No, you feed this rascal child.
He is worshipping my enemy.
So mother somehow gave under pressure.
But still nothing happened to Prahlad Maharaj.
So maximum torment, maximum torture.
But he was completely undisturbed.
So Prahlad Maharaj tells,
what is the secret of my being undisturbed from all these things?
So this is a very great secret.
And what is that secret?
So Prahlad Maharaj tells in the second half of the Shloka,
Because I am tasting something very, very nectarean, very, very pleasant.
I am tasting the great nectar.
So that is why I am not at all disturbed by anything else.
So if a person who is tasting some very high grade of food,
something very delicious,
then he will not eat rotten food.
But if a person is very, very hungry,
he would settle for anything.
As Prabhupada was telling,
and we also have seen in the news reports, it so happens,
I also personally saw how the brothers were trapped.
And the building collapsed.
I think it was an earthquake.
And these brothers were there.
And for many, many days they were trapped.
So people ask them, how did you survive?
So they told we were drinking each other's urine.
And like this in concentration camps after World War.
So it is recorded that people would eat stool also,
human stool to survive.
So if you are so hungry, you will eat anything survived by enemies.
In this way, we do not know actually how to become happy.
The material pleasure, which is addictive and never satisfying in nature,
and you have to work very hard for it,
that is taken as platform of happiness.
But everybody is dissatisfied.
The more you enjoy, the more you indulge,
the more dissatisfaction increases in life.
But if a person has got a higher taste, higher pleasure,
he would not fall for these lower pleasures.
So Prahlad Maharaj is telling,
I am not at all disturbed by any of these material disturbances.
Why?
Because I am relishing the nectar,
a very extraordinary kind of pleasure.
And from where Prahlad Maharaj is relishing that extraordinary pleasure,
he tells,
Veer means glories.
Tvad means yours.
Gayan means I am singing.
I am always engaged in glorifying you.
Magna means absorbed.
Chitta means consciousness.
My consciousness is completely absorbed in singing your glories.
So this is the secret which is being revealed by Prahlad Maharaj.
So we understand that in order to advance in spiritual life,
to understand soul, God and become happy,
we need to control our senses,
remain always equipoised,
not disturbed by distress or absence of distress,
which is called happiness,
some temporary sense enjoyment.
So a person needs to be equipoised.
So those people who are equipoised,
they only can relish the spiritual pleasure,
they only can understand the science of self and God.
So how to remain equipoised?
How to remain undisturbed by anything?
So this is the secret.
A person has to be completely absorbed in glorifying the Lord.
So we do not realize the power of these prayers,
but of course to reach such a platform,
a person needs to practice how to offer these prayers
offenselessly to Lord.
So God can be understood only if he describes himself
or when the devotees glorify him,
they offer prayers whenever they see God
or they feel the presence of God,
they feel influenced by the energy of God,
Prabhupada explains.
Unless a person is influenced by the energy of God,
he cannot offer prayers.
Just like when a person gets influenced by the energy of a cricketer,
they start chanting,
Sachin, Sachin or Dhoni or whatever they are chanting now.
So when you get influenced by somebody,
automatically you want to play, glorify, sing, dance for that person,
we see they do for celebrities and cricketers and all sportsmen.
How people are so much watching them with rapt attention
and glorifying them, talking about them.
This is natural for us.
But if you do it for a mundane person, conditioned soul like us,
it won't satisfy us.
It will not give us Mahamrita.
Magna Chitta will not happen.
But here when a person does it for God, does it for Krishna,
it is a great science.
We all can experiment it for ourselves.
We have to do it, execute under proper direction of spiritual master.
So there are nine elements,
devotional items, which can transform a person to the spiritual state of existence.
So now we are not aware of the reality of the spiritual state of affairs,
and we are just aware of this temporary reality,
which changes with bodies in this world.
So in order to come to real platform,
we are eternal, reality is also eternal.
If you want to see what this world is in reality,
beyond this temporary manifestations,
this world is just compared to sandcastles.
As the children, they go to the beach.
In Mumbai, you can find beaches there.
Juhu beach or party beach and so many such a long stretches there.
Their children go and play.
They make some sandcastles.
And then the parents call the children back.
Now come here.
And the wave comes or they dismantle the castle.
Next day, they will go.
They'll build a castle again.
This is what is happening with us here.
We are making castles, some education, some degrees, some name, fame,
some people around us.
And a wave comes on.
God calls. Come on.
There is time. Now go to next body.
And everything is dismantled again.
Next life you build.
So this is happening.
But beyond this, beyond that small temporary castle,
the children, along with their parents, they have a life.
They have their house.
They have their real activities.
That is just pastime, which is happening for a small time.
And this living entity has got eternal activities with God.
But for a short while, the living entity comes here
and gets trapped in this temporary creations.
So in order to come to real platform,
it is told in the Vedas, nine processes have to be performed.
Which are those nine processes?
Shravanam, Kirtanam, Vishnuho, Smaranam, Pada, Sevanam,
Archanam, Vandanam, Dasyam, Sakhyam, Atma, Nivedanam.
Shravanam, a person can simply hear Krishna,
Krishna's name, Krishna's instruction.
Kirtanam, he can chant the name, instructions, qualities, pastimes.
Smaranam, he can remember, just like Prahlad Maharaj, he was remembering.
And there could be combination also.
A person can chant and remember at the same time.
Or a person can practice any of these nine items.
Then Vandanam, offering prayers, is another very important item.
So a person can worship God, a person can offer prayers to God,
a person can hear about God, he can talk about God.
Dasyam, he can carry out the orders of God.
By any of these processes, by following more than one or all the nine processes,
a person can enjoy an extraordinary happiness in one's life.
This is the only recommendation of the Vedas, how to attain this spiritual platform.
So today we will try to see these verses of Bhagavad Gita,
which are the prayers offered by Arjuna.
So Arjuna is declaring the position of Lord Krishna.
So when we have to offer prayers, a few things are important if we have to attain this platform.
First thing is, these prayers should be sung by a pure devotee of Krishna.
Because we do not know God, we may not properly glorify God.
So Srila Prabhupada gives an example.
So there was an old lady, an old lady was facing an issue.
And of course, government officials are always there to help simple people,
some good officials you always find.
And one such very high official, I think magistrate or somebody,
he happened to come across this issue and he held the woman.
So woman became very happy.
And for woman, the highest authority, the powerful, the most powerful government official was a havaldaar.
You know, havaldaar would come to village and you would keep the things in order.
People were scared of him. He was authority there.
Magistrate, no idea.
So this person solves the problem of that old lady.
And then she becomes very pleased.
And then she's offering prayers.
May God make you very nice havaldaar.
So she's thinking that she's offering some very nice glorification,
something very good blessings for the other person.
But that is actually a demotion for that man.
So nobody can actually satisfy God unless one knows God.
So that is why if we have to satisfy God, we have to offer the prayers of pure devotees,
like Arjuna, Prithu Maharaj, Dhruv Maharaj, Prahlad Maharaj in the Vedas,
or as it is mentioned in the Holy Quran, Bible, so many places it is mentioned.
But prayers have to be offered in the footsteps of their pure devotees.
And when the pure devotees chant the prayers, the prayers, all those words,
any word which is spoken by the pure devotee, they carry special spiritual potency.
And another important thing is these prayers, rather than being offered directly to the Lord,
should be offered through the medium of spiritual master.
So that is why those people who know the science how to worship God,
they worship God through spiritual master.
Unless you worship spiritual master, there is no question of satisfying God directly.
So thus, worshipping spiritual master is very, very important.
So thus, in our temples, whenever we start worship, we start worshipping spiritual master,
then grand spiritual master means his spiritual master,
then spiritual master or spiritual master.
In this way, any worship is being offered, it reaches Krishna.
So prayer should not be offered to Krishna directly.
Basically, prayer should be offered through the medium of spiritual master.
And we should repeat the prayers of spiritual master or of pure devotees.
In this way, when we do the prayers, then a person can transform himself to a very high state of consciousness,
a very high state of bliss, simply by chanting the prayers.
So let us see these wonderful prayers which Arjuna is going to offer,
seeing this universal form of Lord Krishna.
Text no. 35
Sanjay said to Dhritarashtra,
O King, after hearing these words from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Arjuna trembled, fearfully offered obeisances with folded hands,
and began falteringly to speak as follows.
So we will first go through all the prayers and then we will read the translations.
Text no. 35
Sanjay said to Arjuna,
Text no. 35
Sanjay said to Arjuna,
Text no. 35
So these are the prayers offered by Arjuna.
So we can also offer these prayers every day.
So we are chanting, we are hearing Krishna's name,
we are worshipping Krishna.
So offering prayers also is a very, very important element.
So Krishna has come here in the form of Deity.
Any form that we see of Krishna that is not different from Arjuna,
So Krishna has come here in the form of Deity.
Any form that we see of Krishna that is not different from Krishna.
If a person has devotion,
then those forms either in the form of a laminated picture
or on the computer screen or any form, wherever we see form of God,
God and His form, there is actually no difference.
This is the science of God.
There is no difference between God, His form, His name.
So whenever you see any form of God,
then we should understand God is personally present here.
Whenever we chant or hear the name of God,
we have to chant and hear with the realization,
understanding that God is present here.
Then we'll be able to treat the Holy Name form with great respect.
So we should approach the forms of the Lord,
and then we should offer these wonderful prayers.
This is the way of establishing relationship.
Just like in this world also, if we have to establish relationship,
we have to praise the qualities of other person, glorify the other person,
and then the relationship is established.
So this feature is coming because God also likes to be praised.
And so if we employ this process,
then we will see how we are able to attain this platform gradually.
We are able to enjoy the spiritual pleasure simply by offering these prayers.
So now let us see the translation.
What is the meaning of these prayers?
So Arjuna said,
So this is a very nice prayer Krishna is telling.
The world becomes joyful upon hearing your name,
unless the living entity is very, very conditioned.
Just like a person who is fit, they will get taste upon eating the food item,
but sick person will not get.
So those who are materially very conditioned,
so we have to wait for some time.
We have to keep on hearing, hearing, hearing,
and slowly we also start becoming joyful by hearing these names.
So the world becomes joyful upon hearing your name,
and thus everyone becomes attached to you.
So there are two kinds of treatment which Lord Krishna meets out to demons and to devotees.
The devotees are saved, protected by Krishna,
and the demons are killed by Krishna.
So a person can tell why God is so cruel,
why God is not taking care.
This was not rightly done by God,
as some people tell Krishna is not right
because he caused the killing of so many people on the battlefield of Kurukshetra.
And some people sometimes, no, no, but here Krishna was very nice.
He saved his friends.
He saved his father, mother and other people from the danger.
So this is very nice activity.
But here Arjuna is telling all this is rightly done.
So those people who are advanced in the science of God,
they admit they understand that everything done by Krishna is quite fit.
We are not able to understand.
So when we take to Krishna consciousness perfectly,
so whatever happens in our life,
Prabhupada quotes very nicely how Narad Muni,
he goes and he speaks sarcastically to Lord Narayan.
So nobody can be sarcastic with God.
But Narad Muni is so elevated that he's having that relationship with God
that he can pass such sarcastic comments also in a joking manner.
Very elevated platform.
So Narad Muni tells, so see your devotees are there.
They are very much attached to you.
And just see what has happened to them.
Their father died and they lost their kingdom.
And they so many life attempts have happened.
And they are roaming around in the jungle.
They have lost their wealth.
So very nice thing has happened to them by being your devotee.
So a person can think that they are such strong devotees, staunch devotees,
why they are suffering.
And some people can become atheists, just like after World War.
Many women, they went to church that let our sons, husbands, brothers come back.
But of course, World War saw huge many deaths and they did not come back.
So they became atheists.
So a person who is not very advanced, he can become many times you meet people.
Yes, we were worshipping God for last years, last some years.
We have left this worship.
Now we don't worship.
So something bad happened in their life and they become atheists.
They don't want to worship.
So they don't understand just like a father.
Sometimes father may slap.
That is also for good of child.
And sometimes the father can feed nice sweet dishes.
That is also for the benefit of child.
Both things are out of love, slapping or feeding both in a similar fashion.
Sometimes Krishna may save the physical body of the devotee.
And sometimes there could be some trouble to the physical body of devotee.
But all this is for the benefit of devotee who is beyond this physical body.
Sometimes the body has to be torn apart just like the person is having some disease.
So chemotherapy is given and so much suffering is there so that the person can be saved ultimately.
So some sufferings even on material platform, we can see they are good in a similar fashion.
So those living entities whose mind and body they have become completely demoniac.
Demoniac means they are putting other living entities into unlimited suffering.
So those people are killed and such killing is actually mercy of God.
Because they have become so wrongly oriented that this body now it has become so much tamasic.
It will do more and more criminal activities.
So if that body is killed, then that person is saved from committing so many other crimes.
Just like the child who is about to swallow some poison, parents will come and give a slap.
What are you eating? So that is for the safety of the child.
If the child is walking carelessly on the road, he may get a slap so that he can be careful.
Otherwise it would be harm for the child.
In a similar fashion, we have to understand the bodies.
The killing also happens sometimes by God.
But nothing is out of love. Everybody is child of Krishna.
Those children who have got into bodies which have become demoniac,
they are prone to put other living entities into suffering.
As per the laws of nature, Krishna does not interfere in the laws.
Everything happens here by the laws.
Unless somebody is devotee or somebody is great demon, then Krishna comes and does special interference.
So these demons, they will create unlimited suffering in their life.
So Krishna comes and stops them, saves them from creating more suffering in their lives.
So this is also mercy of Krishna.
And another special thing happens because Krishna is supremely pure.
As soon as the demoniac people, they come in contact with Krishna, they are killed personally by Krishna.
So they become completely purified and they also get liberated from the process of birth and death.
So this platform is attained by yogis after doing many many years of meditation.
And the demons attain this platform simply by being touched by Krishna in the pastime of killing.
So thus we have to understand sometimes we may lose, just like the Pandavas.
They also lost, although that is done with special devotees, not with ordinary devotees.
So special devotees, just to bring them closer to his lotus feet and just to glorify them,
just see what is their character, so much difficulty they had.
Still their faith devotion in me always increased.
So to show the real position of devotee, how he can remain undisturbed in every circumstances,
Krishna put such devotees into such difficulties.
So unless he is given poison, nobody can see his powers, that how poison is not acting upon his body.
Unless Haridas Thakur is beaten, unless Prabhupada suffered from heart attacks and continued,
unless Meera Bai was given poison and nothing happened.
So how will the pure devotees, their position would be glorified?
So unless Bhishma is lying on the bed of arrows and is giving wonderful philosophy
and knowledge from the arrow bed without any disturbance,
so all these pastimes which are apparently painful,
they actually are meant to glorify the devotees and increase their devotion for Krishna.
So pure devotees are always remembered for these extraordinary activities.
So we have to understand, physical suffering is not suffering for us.
And in a similar fashion, not just physical, on the physical platform,
name, fame or X, Y, Z, any other thing is not going to satisfy us.
So thus sometimes when we are following Krishna consciousness, the mind can be disturbed.
Oh, it is very difficult. Who will get up early in the morning?
There is so much disturbance in there in the mind.
No, this disturbance we have to take.
In this way, if we disturb our mind to make it rise up early in the morning,
we chant God's name, then we will always be happy.
Otherwise, if we try to please the mind by sense enjoyment like people do now,
they always remain in distress. All the mind may get temporary satisfaction.
So we have to understand this very, very important science.
Do not get scared of physical troubles or mental troubles.
We are spirit soul. We have to care about spiritual enjoyment.
So now Arjuna is understanding that whether somebody is fearful of you,
somebody is dying because of your direction or somebody is being saved,
everything is for the good of the living entities.
So this is what faith we are supposed to have when we follow Krishna consciousness.
Next Arjuna says, Oh, great one who stands above even Brahma.
You are the original master. Why should they not offer their homage up to you?
Oh, limitless one. Oh, refuge of the universe.
You are the invincible source, the cause of all causes,
transcendental to this material manifestation.
So here Arjuna is telling,
You are means you are better than even Brahma.
So some people are confused who is supreme. Brahma is supreme. Shiva is supreme.
So Lord Shiva comes from Lord Brahma and Lord Brahma is also inferior to Lord Krishna.
So here Arjuna is telling the greatest devotee,
the most wise person who was qualified to receive knowledge directly from God.
So his conclusion cannot be wrong. So he's telling you are more than Brahma.
Adikartre means the supreme creator.
Ananta means unlimited. It means everything that we see here in this world,
it is under the influence of Krishna's energy.
Krishna is present everywhere in this world,
either personally or through the energies which are coming out of his body.
Just like milk comes out of cow's body and the milk gets transformed into curds,
then into butter, buttermilk, ghee and so many other things.
Sweet delicacies, XYZ. These are all transformation of cow's energy.
In a similar fashion, Krishna and Krishna's energy, there is nothing else in this world.
So either Krishna is personally present or his energy directly in the spiritual form
or spiritual energy transformed into matter, material energy.
But ultimately everything is Krishna's energy and transformations of energies of Krishna.
So thus Krishna is Ananta in this way. There is no end to it.
Everywhere there is just Krishna, Krishna and his energy.
Devesha, devatas are very very powerful people worship Devesha.
Isha means controller but there is somebody who controls the devas also and he is Krishna, Devesha.
Jagannivasa, this entire universe, it comes out of the body of Krishna.
Just like our body also, we release perspiration.
In a similar fashion, the bubbles come out of the body of a very great personality
and that body is called Mahavishnu.
It may be difficult to conceive but we can understand.
We are producing so many living entities, so many bacteria and so many other things.
We produce constantly, our body produces constantly, within and without.
And sometimes, you know, those people don't have clean hairs.
They have these small insects in the hair also, on the scalp.
And if you don't take bath, then you will develop various insects on your body also.
When there is disease, various insects they develop.
So our body also has got capacity of generating various kinds of living entities
and other species also apart from human species we can generate.
So we have this capacity because God is also having this capacity.
All the species, all the bodies of this universe, entire universe is coming out of Krishna.
So that is why he is called Jagannivasa, the entire refuge of the universe.
The universe comes out of his body and it is maintained by the energy of Krishna.
Tum aksharam sad asat tat param yat.
What is the meaning of aksharam? Aksharam is imperishable.
It is not that the father creates the son and then the father dies.
Krishna is different kind of father. Krishna is aksharam.
So Krishna has created this temporary world.
And even when this temporary world is destroyed, Krishna continues to exist.
He is imperishable.
Sad asat means cause and effect.
This material world is the place of cause and effect.
Tat param and Krishna is beyond this cause and effect, beyond the material world.
So even though material world is destroyed, Krishna remains as it is.
Tum adi deva purusha puranaha.
You are the original personality, the Godhead.
You are the only sanctuary of this manifested cosmic world.
You know everything and you are all that is knowable.
Because we discussed everything is nothing but Krishna and his energy.
So anything that we are knowing that is nothing but Krishna.
Either personally Krishna or Krishna's energy.
Energy and person there is no difference because energy cannot exist without person.
Person cannot exist without his energies.
If there is no energy in our body we are dead.
And unless we are existing our energies cannot exist.
So person exists with his energy.
So either we are studying the energy or we are studying the energetic.
Ultimately it is Krishna only.
So thus Krishna is the person who knows everything perfectly.
Because everything is him and his energy.
And if a person is trying to know anything in this world,
he is knowing Krishna only in different transformations.
You are above the material modes or limitless form.
This whole cosmic manifestation is pervaded by you.
You are air, fire, water and you are the moon.
You are the supreme controller and the grandfather.
Why grandfather?
Because Brahma is said to be pitamaha.
Pitamaha means father, the original living entity.
And prapitamaha means father of father.
So Brahma has come from the navel of Garbhodakshayi Vishnu.
So thus Krishna is being addressed here as prapitamaha or grandfather.
And he is the supreme controller.
So we are confused who is the supreme controller?
Vishdevi, Vishdevta.
So here Arjuna, the perfect student of the Vedas,
he is declaring, you are the supreme controller.
Thus I offer my respectful obeisances unto you
a thousand times and again and yet again.
Obesances from the front, from behind and from all sides.
O unbounded power, you are the master of limitless might.
You are all pervading and thus you are everything.
I have in the past addressed you as,
O Krishna, O Yadav, O my friend,
without knowing your glories,
please forgive whatever I may have done in madness or in love.
I have dishonoured you many times while relaxing
or while lying on the same bed or eating together,
sometimes alone and sometimes in front of many friends.
Please excuse me for all my offenses.
You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation,
the worshipable chief, the spiritual master.
No one is equal to you, nor can anyone be one with you.
Within the three worlds you are immeasurable.
So here very nicely, this verse is also very important,
Krishna is being addressed here as the spiritual master.
So Krishna is the original spiritual master,
being the creator of the world,
and anybody who simply repeats the instructions of Krishna,
he is to be accepted as spiritual master
if we cannot approach Krishna directly like Arjuna and Brahma.
So most of the living entities have no such direct contact with Krishna.
So there is no loss.
Either you understand computer directly from the manufacturer
or through the user manual which the manufacturer has passed on to us.
We get the same knowledge.
So thus there is no difference if we hear from spiritual master
who is coming in Guru Parampara from Krishna
or if we hear directly from Krishna.
So we are as fortunate as Arjuna was,
provided we hear in the consciousness of Arjuna
in complete surrender and service attitude.
So Krishna is called Guru.
Nowadays many Gurus are there who have not read even Bhagavad Gita.
So what is the qualification?
They cannot repeat the words of the manufacturer,
thus their knowledge is imperfect.
Then Krishna is being addressed here as
There are many philosophies which tell
You can also become God or you are God.
You have to realize that.
So here Arjuna is telling Krishna
Nobody is equal to you.
Nobody can become one with you.
You are topmost.
So thus all such philosophies are not supported by Arjuna here.
And bear with me as a father with a son
or a friend with his friend
or a lover with his beloved.
After seeing this universal form which I have never seen before,
I am gladdened.
But at the same time, my mind is disturbed with fear.
Therefore, please bestow Your grace upon me
and reveal again Your form as the personality of Godhead,
O Lord of the Lords, O abode of the Universe.
So Krishna wanted to show this form to Arjuna
understanding the desire of Arjuna
that no living entity in future should be cheated by false incarnations.
So thus Arjuna is requesting Krishna
Okay, I have seen this Virat Rukh now.
Now please show me Your four-handed Chaturbhaja form.
So Arjuna does not want to leave any scope for future imitators
who may tell that I am also God.
Today, unfortunately, leaders or founders of many spiritual organizations,
they tell I am God.
So we can request them that Arjuna requested Krishna
please show me Your universal form.
So please show the entire universe in your body,
that expansion you show,
or you show this four-handed form which Krishna is going to show Arjuna now.
And if somebody cannot show, then simply telling I am God is not sufficient.
So now we will conclude this chapter in the next session
with a very important subject matter of discussion.
Vishnu has come from Krishna or Krishna has come from Vishnu.
So this very nice revelation which can be cause of confusion among many people,
it will be cleared.
And Krishna will declare His real form in the concluding verses.
And these verses also cover the essence of the entire Bhagavad Gita.
So please do not miss. We will understand in the next class.
So these prayers are very important. Please try to offer the prayers.
You can offer these prayers which we discussed today,
verse number 35 to 45 what Arjuna is offering here.
Like this many many prayers are there in the Bhagavatam.
Kunti Marani is offering, Dhruv Maharaj is offering, Pralad Maharaj is offering,
Lord Shiva is offering, Lord Brahma is offering,
Shukadev Goswami is offering, Prithu Maharaj is offering,
Prachetas are offering, many such prayers of devotees are there.
So all such prayers or one such prayer we can take out.
We can go and sit in front of temple or in front of Krishna.
If temple is not there, simply have a picture of Krishna on your phone.
Start offering these prayers little every day.
And then you see how you will start feeling gradual spiritual progression in your life.
So if at all we have to gain freedom from all the laws of nature,
always remain in a state of bliss, Krishna consciousness affords that facility.
It is not that you do meditation only that time you are feeling bliss.
Other times you are disturbed, you are anxious. No.
Krishna consciousness means whether you are eating, you are walking, you are talking,
you are working on your computer, always you are having a very high consciousness of bliss.
And that is only possible when you are constantly meditating upon the form of Krishna,
spiritual master within the heart and constantly offering prayers.
This is the practice that we have to do.
That is why it is told, Satatam Kirtayanto Maam.
Krishna tells in Bhagavad Gita, always keep on chanting my name.
Man mana bhavmat bhakto, think of me always.
So always we have to practice this thing.
Always chant the names of Krishna in every circumstance and try to think of Krishna.
And I had shared this post on Instagram.
Those of you who have read, please read this again.
Five, six very, very important points are mentioned here in this very important instruction
which Prabhupada is telling to one of his disciples.
So Prabhupada tells, first of all, in every circumstance,
we have to chant the name of Krishna and meditate upon the form of Krishna within the heart.
In every circumstance, continuously throughout the day, we can keep on doing.
But this practice is made possible only when we follow the first instruction of that of that quote.
And the first instruction is when somebody works very hard for Krishna, then Krishna is satisfied.
So when we work hard.
So when we work hard, then Krishna is pleased and automatically Krishna manifests his form within our heart.
So hard work is very important and constantly offering prayers is important.
Meditation is important and this will also happen when you follow two other instructions,
which we will cover in the next class.
Also, you can revisit that important quote, which I have just shared today morning.
So each and every quote instruction of Prabhupada is very, very important.
So if you follow these things, then only there is a possibility.
Then there is not just possibility.
There is guarantee that 24 hours, whatever activity we do,
we'll be always enjoying spiritual happiness and we'll be freed from the laws of nature.
So please practice this as far as possible.
Try to implement this very important instruction in your life.
