Prabhuji, how can I directly start chapter 10 before mantra meditation?
I haven't even read chapter 1.
So if you can read from the beginning, it is very nice.
But as far as hearing is concerned, Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavatam, it can be heard from anywhere.
Prabhupada gives example.
And in Bhagavatam also the example is given.
So Shrimad Bhagavatam is compared with the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic literature.
So fruit is there, mango, you eat from any end, it will taste sweet always.
So in a similar fashion, you pick up Shrimad Bhagavatam or for that matter Bhagavad Gita.
Anywhere you read, it is very wonderful knowledge.
But for systematic understanding, it is recommended for proper spiritual realization.
A sincere student should go page by page, end to end, cover to cover without skipping anything.
However, hearing, reading can be done from anywhere, it is sweet.
So it does not matter, you can definitely for systematic understanding start from chapter 1.
But do not miss hearing, whatever we are discussing.
Maybe initially if you are very new to Bhagavad Gita, some technical terms, you will get to know in couple of classes.
But anybody can start from anywhere, directly hearing Bhagavad Gita and Bhagavatam.
So all the questions, you can please park it.
Because during discussion it will be solved and after that we have dedicated time.
In between if we agitate our minds with many questions, then hearing will be lost.
So spiritual realization happens by attentive hearing.
This is very very important.
So that is why questions, if anything comes in your mind, you can write it down or whatever.
You can park it in your mind or in written format.
At the end we have proper dedicated time for discussion.
So now let us start with the first verse of today.
Universal form, text 1.
So we saw in the previous chapter, Lord Krishna explained about his opulences.
And the very important Bhagavad Gita in a nutshell.
We discussed 10th chapter, verse number 8, 9, 10 and 11.
That comprises the most important knowledge, all the knowledge of Bhagavad Gita in a nutshell.
That is called Chatushloki Bhagavad Gita.
And after describing all this knowledge, when Krishna kept on describing his opulence,
finally Krishna mentions to Arjuna,
Athva bahunayateyana kim gyateyana tavarjuna vishthabhyaham idam krishnam ekanshena sthito jagat.
That is the last verse of last chapter.
So Krishna told, what is the use of all this knowledge, Arjuna?
Simply by a fragment of my expansion, from a small fragment, I am maintaining this entire material creation.
So many unlimited universes I am maintaining, but I don't need to engage myself completely.
A small fragment, a small expansion of mine, ekanshena, one ansha, that is Lord Mahavishnu.
He can expand himself in such a huge form.
All the universes are emanating from his body.
And then he enters into each of the universes as Garbhodakshayi Vishnu.
Then he enters in the heart of all the living entities as Paramatma,
who also lives on the Shwetadweep Kshirsagar as Shirodakshayi Vishnu.
Thus, Lord Krishna expands himself into three Vishnu forms and then eventually into unlimited forms.
And each and every atom, Shirodakshayi Vishnu enters as the super soul.
So in this fashion, just by one fragmental expansion, Krishna is sustaining the entire material universe.
So he told, what is the use of all this knowledge, Arjuna?
So now Arjuna is explaining to Krishna this verse.
Arjuna said, I have heard your instruction on confidential spiritual matters,
which you have so kindly delivered unto me, and my illusion is now dispelled.
Arjuna said, I have heard your instruction on confidential spiritual matters,
which you have so kindly delivered unto me, and my illusion is now dispelled.
So there are many, many important words in this verse.
And especially two words, it is very important to discuss for the beginners.
And that is,
Krishna is telling, Arjuna is telling to Krishna,
So by the knowledge which you have kindly explained to me, I am free from this illusion and bewilderment.
So all the complexities of life, all the sufferings that we have,
actually that is not on the foundation of reality, but it is on the foundation of illusion.
We keep on hearing moho and maya. Maya means that which is not.
Ma means not, ya means this. So this does not exist as you are perceiving it.
That is called maya, illusion.
And this maya creates moha, bewilderment.
So this material energy of Krishna confuses the living entities.
Just like a magician on the stage, he may be cutting a girl into two pieces,
but actually there is nothing of that sort happening.
In a similar fashion, the living entity, he cries, suffers,
and sometimes he gets elated, becomes very happy.
But all this happiness and distress is based on the foundation of illusion for a materialist.
And how does this bewilderment, it begins?
So I think this answer should come from the audience's side.
So I request, can you please explain, we have been discussing,
those who have heard even mantra yoga sessions recently, they also can suggest,
and those who are hearing Bhagavad Gita, they should tell us how this illusion begins.
What is the cause of this illusion? You can kindly write in the chat box.
False ego, desire, forgetfulness, ignorance through the three modes of nature,
considering you as body, yes, this is the first illusion.
I am this body, and all the further illusions, they are based on this concept that I am the body.
This is the first illusion. But how a person falls into this illusion that I am this body?
I have told Ashoka also more than a couple of times.
Lust, bodily conception, yes, bodily conception is the beginning of illusion, how does it come?
So again, it is being told lust, somebody is telling anger by ignoring God,
our karma, envy of Krishna, by being in the bodily concept.
Yes, I am asking how bodily concept comes, bodily concept is an illusion.
Material desire and three modes of nature.
And any specific material desire, one specific material desire is being mentioned.
So lust means any kind of enjoyment, now this is very important point which we are discussing.
So we have to be precise, we have to precisely understand.
Lust means, lust is defined in Bhagavad Gita as
Any kind of desire of enjoyment in which Krishna's pleasure is not involved, that is called lust.
So which kind of lust, you are correct, a special kind of lust.
Forgetfulness of Krishna, that is also a fact.
Due to ignorance, we want to enjoy like Krishna, right, that is fact.
Senses, indriyas, which special act of indriya?
Because of relating us with body and not so limited sight and limited senses.
Delusion starts when we start identifying, yes, why we start identifying ourselves with this body?
Wanting to be enjoyed, sense gratification, that is fact.
Which kind of sense gratification?
Lust, sense gratification is fact.
Can anybody give a close understanding?
Yes, that is a fact.
By Iksha and Dvesha, which kind of Iksha?
Oh yes, and here comes the right answer.
So right answer is given by Vinayak Prabhu.
And Satyam is also right on the spot.
And now everyone has understood.
Kamal Nayan Prabhu is also telling the right answer.
Okay, okay, others are still not getting.
Okay, let me explain.
Okay, thank you so much for your answers.
Now let us continue hearing attentively.
So there is the shloka in the Bhagavatam it mentions.
As Chaitanya Charitamrita describes first.
As soon as a person forgets Krishna.
As soon as a person forgets Krishna, the pleasure from his life is finished.
Our natural position of enjoyment is by absorbing ourselves constantly in the thoughts and service of Krishna.
So as soon as a person forgets Krishna, then the pleasure in life is missing.
Then a person gets captured by the illusion.
And when a person forgets Krishna, he forgets how to please Krishna.
Then he starts developing because then he becomes disturbed.
Then he tries to satisfy his own self, his senses.
And there is this special kind of sense enjoyment is all the sensual pleasure enjoyment.
It puts us in illusion.
As we have discussed many times before, just drinking, smoking is not intoxication, is not addiction.
Any kind of sense enjoyment is addiction.
So this common sense our educators do not have.
That please understand why you are banning only or trying to restrict only tobacco or other things, liquor.
Every kind of sense enjoyment is intoxication.
You don't need it in the first place in association of materialists.
Just like somebody tells you, let us go and drink, let us go and smoke.
In a similar fashion, people tell you, let us go and watch a movie.
Let us go and have some other pleasure.
Let us go and eat this thing.
These things are not demanded by us in the first place.
But in the absence of pleasure, we fall for these addictions.
But however, no addiction is as strong, as binding as this one which Bhagavatam describes as
So please excuse me if I am putting a stone on your heart.
But that is a fact.
That is why Bhagavatam is called Amalapuranam.
Bhagavatam does not compromise.
But this is a fact.
The pleasure which is considered topmost and everybody is hankering after it, that pleasure is
Punsa means male and sthriya means female.
This is a combination of male and female when they combine together.
Then a very strong knot is developed in the heart.
Anyway a person is attached to this material world.
That is why even sannyasis told that do not stay under a tree for more than one night.
Keep on traveling.
So sannyasis supposed to always travel, advanced sannyasis, not in the initial stages.
Keep on traveling so that you do not become attached to anything.
Even a person can get attached to a tree if he is sleeping under the same tree every night.
So keep on moving, no attachment.
But no attachment, it is mentioned in Bhagavatam and throughout the Vedic literatures, is as strong as
combination of male and female.
When male and female combine together, then what happens?
Strong knot.
All the material energy, it acts through the heart of the living entity.
So that is why the purpose of yoga system, meditation is to always
to come to a stage of samadhi.
What is samadhi?
When a person is constantly thinking of
when he is meditating upon Lord Krishna within the heart constantly.
So when a person is always thinking, meditating completely absorbed in thought of
Vishnu within the heart in form of Lord Vishnu, Lord Krishna, then that stage is called samadhi.
So material energy cannot act at that time.
But as long as a person is not every second meditating upon form of Krishna within the heart,
then the energy, material energy will act through the heart.
So in this heart, very strong binding knot develops when there is combination of male and female.
And then what happens?
So then when this heart knot develops, when male and female combine,
then the child comes out and though so many other requirements are there,
then you need a house. If a person is single, then he is carefree.
So I was speaking to one person and he follows Krishna Consciousness to some extent.
Couple of rounds he chants and then he has studied a lot.
He has done double masters after B.Tech and then PhD and then postdoc.
And then now again, he's planning another degree in another field.
I told, what is your plan? Which country you're going to go?
He's telling I'll go to this country, then another country.
After that, I'll take some degree. And I told, after that, what are you going to do?
It will not decided anything. I'll see what happens.
So all this wonderful engagement in life is coming up because that person is single,
although he is having some age, but still single.
So if a person is single, then there is no need of any botheration.
He can live here, there, anywhere, travel. Sometimes money is there, sometimes money is not there.
It does not matter. But when there's combination of male and female,
then you need a house to stay. Graha is required.
And then to maintain house, graha kshetra, then you need kshetra.
Kshetra means field. So this very hard working culture, what we see now,
which is very, very tormenting, that is not recommended in the Vedic culture.
All these huge factories, industries complicating the life, destroying the planet.
And fortunately, people are understanding now.
Many youngsters are understanding that it is very important to be a minimalist
because there is no need to one's desires. It is only greed.
So have a minimal life, just minimal things with you.
And in this way, the planet and we also can sustain very peacefully.
So kshetra is recommended as general occupation for most of the people.
So what is the need of going to office ultimately?
You will get some money from that money. You will purchase some food.
Your food, you can grow. It is fresh, chemical free food, organic food.
You can grow. Just have a field.
And then you need to have a house, have a house in the same field.
And the materials of the house you can assemble by growing wood.
Your clothes you can produce in the same field by producing cotton.
And in this way, Vedic culture tells just have cow and just have a field.
And then let the whole world economy go to hell.
But you are not at all disturbed because you have a field and you have cow
and you have a small well there.
So everything is sufficiently supplied by nature.
There is no dearth of water. You need not wait for water supply.
Today there is shortage or something is happening.
So always you have water with you in the well or near water reservoir.
You have a field with you.
Whatever you need to eat, you can grow over there.
And now people would run uselessly for one or two hours in the morning.
Same effort we can put in field and there would be some nice fruits
and vegetables for you.
What is the use of running for no result?
So the same one or two hours you spend on the farm
and that too just three months in a year.
And then balance nine months you are free to cultivate Krishna consciousness
full time very nicely.
So in this way, very simple life is being recommended
and people will following in the Vedic culture.
Nobody would take job.
So but still hard work is required, it is told.
But a brahmachari is very free. He can just roam around.
Trees are there, fruits are there. He can just keep on wandering.
No problem at all.
But then you need to work hard. You will have field and you have to go there.
And now, of course, in the absence of field,
you have to work much more hard in jobs and businesses and all.
So you need Kshetra. Kshetra means field.
In today's terminology, it can be taken as occupation.
Once they have combined together, then you need a proper job.
And then, then children would come.
If there is no child, then the couple is always dissatisfied.
So the demands always keep on increasing.
First they combine together, then you need a house,
then you need an occupation, and then you need children.
And when you have children, then you have relatives with you.
And these relatives make hell of your life.
All the pressure in our life is because of the relatives only.
You have to show off to the relatives.
And thus, you have to work very hard.
Relatives working hard, you are also working hard.
So Aapta means relatives.
And in this way, just to maintain the status quo in the life,
everybody is working very, very hard.
Janas se mo hoyam aham ameti.
In this way, a person falls into illusion step by step.
So there's hard knot in the heart by a combination of man and woman.
And then there is house. This is my house.
And then this body produces some children.
And then you think these are my children.
So many children are there in the world.
So many of them are taking birth.
We are not affected.
So many of them are dying also.
We are not affected.
But when I produce some bodies, then I get attached.
This belongs to me. Aham ameti.
First of all, I think aham, I am this body.
And mama, this is me.
And this belongs to me.
Actually, nothing belongs to us.
This body is a dress given to us.
It is not in our control.
As per laws of nature, it will dwindle.
It will vanish.
For some time, we are allowed to stay here.
But we start thinking I am this body.
This illusion develops.
And then the people who are connected to the body, they belong to me.
I cry in separation.
I become happy in meeting with them.
But this is all illusion.
This attraction or this separation, which we feel, it is just for the dress and not for the person.
If you become very happy by seeing shirt, anybody can wear a shirt.
My enemy, if he comes in that shirt, I would be very glad to see the enemy.
My killer is coming in that shirt.
I would be very, very happy to see and I would welcome him.
So this is called foolishness.
So being happy, seeing the dress and crying for loss of dress is not a sane activity.
So that is why the Vedic literatures in the Bhagavad Gita also we have seen in the second chapter.
This is the first instruction.
So Arjuna was debating with Krishna, not submitting.
And when he submitted himself as disciple, this was the first instruction Krishna gave to Arjuna.
That you are talking like a learned man, but actually you are crying for something which is not worthy of crying.
So you're talking like a very wise man.
But you are mourning for something which is not worthy of grief.
He does not lament at all, either for the living or for the dead.
Because living or dead, it only signifies this dress.
So we get attached to certain dresses and the person is eternal, the traveler who is there in the dress.
Seeing the dress, we become happy, dress is getting torn, we become sad.
So this is called illusion.
This is called moha.
And just somehow to save the dresses and dress will anyway break one day.
It will fall apart.
But somehow we want to elongate it as long as possible.
In this way, we are rushing.
We are crying.
There's there is so much hard work.
There is online request that this person is suffering our relative suffering.
Please give us some money so that he or she can survive.
How long can we make them survive?
Even if you want.
Ultimately, everyone has to die.
So death is sure here and we work very hard.
We want to avoid death so death cannot be solved on material platform.
Body has to vanish, but it can be solved by realizing you are not the body.
You are eternal.
Actually, there is no debt to us at all.
So this is called moha or illusion.
So this entire illusion begins with combination of man and woman.
So, of course, this is taken as very high grade of pleasure, but actually it is not very pleasurable activity.
Just to enjoy this little pleasure of association of man and woman, how much botheration a person has to tolerate and so much tension, so many obligations, so much of hard work just to enjoy this little pleasure.
So when a person comes to the platform of knowledge, that is why we see so much as so many rituals, so much elaboration is there in the Vedic culture.
You come together, you marry, you take circles around the fire.
And then you so many mantras are chanted and so many other rituals.
Fold the hands, open the hands, tie the knot open, do this thing.
And then on birth, there is some ritual on death.
There is some ritual and so many other rituals.
What is the purpose of all these rituals?
This is called varnashrama dharma.
So Sheila Prabhupada explains very beautifully.
The Vedas are explaining the purpose of all these rituals is to remove this knot.
So thus it is the training in the beginning, remain single, brahmachari, then it is allowed if you are not understanding.
But then finally, vanaprastha and sannyasa.
Of course, that is explained, that is given as per the capacity of person.
Those who are least qualified, they cannot stay brahmachari also in the jungle.
They are called shudras.
They cry at very even little disturbance.
They become disturbed very easily.
So those people who become disturbed very easily, they cannot remain peaceful.
They are called shudras.
They lack knowledge.
They are deeply in illusion and job is required for them.
They cannot remain independent.
So such people, it is recommended for them.
Do not follow even brahmacharya.
You cannot follow vanaprastha and sannyasa.
You cannot do penance austerity in the jungle.
So what you can do, you can simply follow rules and regulations of grihasta ashram.
And when a person is further advanced, he has got little more capacity that he need not engage in job,
but he can sustain himself by farming, cultivation, little trading and business.
He is called vaishya.
For him, it is recommended that he follows brahmacharya and grihasta ashram.
Vanaprastha he also cannot follow.
So you follow in this life nicely.
If you are able to do in this life, otherwise in next life you will get chance to advance further.
And in next life, if a person follows nicely, he may become kshatriya.
A kshatriya is supposed to follow brahmacharya, grihasta and vanaprastha also.
Vanaprastha means man and woman.
This combination is difficult to break because he has stayed in house for a long time.
You can go in the jungle with the wife.
But detachment from other family members.
Kshatriya up to vanaprastha.
Sannyas means the wife comes back to home and the man continues.
So this is very difficult.
Only the brahmanas are supposed to follow.
So brahmana, it is very, very difficult to become brahmana.
It's not just by keeping the surname, but by developing the qualities of being avowedly truthful.
Never a person can tell lie.
A person cannot do violence at any cost.
A person is completely forgiving.
A person is very, very simple.
So brahmana only is allowed to go for sannyas.
And after sannyas, the real spiritual life begins.
So ultimately, the purpose of entire vanashrama system is gradually, if not in this life, after many, many lives,
shudra may become vaishya, he may become kshatriya.
One finally, one day finally, or in one birth, he may become brahmana.
He may become sannyasi.
And after sannyas, maybe after many, many lives, Krishna tells,
Only when a person is able to get detached from all the material enjoyment,
which we discussed, it is addiction,
person can come to platform of sanity.
As Chanakya Pandit says,
A person who is hankering after sense enjoyment,
the most wise man, most powerful person we have seen in the history, how amazing he was.
And he has given all the shastras very beautifully, all the material knowledge.
He's very expert in that from politics, diplomacy and economics.
And even in ordinary affairs, how a person can deal very nicely needy shlokas he has given.
So he is telling a person who wants to enjoy Chanakya Pandit, although he was so powerful, so wise, so learned
that he was controlling.
He was giving direction to the controller of entire the king of entire Indian territory.
But Chanakya was leading a very, very simple life in a hut outside the kingdom.
So is he mad? Why is living in a hut such a powerful person?
So actually, this is not madness. That is called knowledge.
So he's telling,
If you want to have knowledge, how is it possible on the platform of sense enjoyment,
which only creates moha illusion in life.
And if you want to have, if you are already there on the platform of knowledge,
then how you can enjoy this material sensual enjoyment,
which is based on the platform of illusion.
So thus, how much ever we try to speculate, we try to think how I am not the body.
Let me think what is fact. I'm eternal. What is God?
It is impossible to understand.
So just like a person who is drunk, he cannot understand what is reality.
In a similar fashion, Prabhupada tells, if you break four regulative principles,
meat eating, intoxication, gambling, illicit sex,
if you keep on breaking these principles, then it is like pouring water on the wood.
How much ever you keep it on fire, if you keep on pouring water, the wood will never get ignited.
But keep the wood dry and with a little contact with fire, immediately it will start burning.
So in a similar fashion, if we want to get that fire of knowledge,
which burns our past karma, immediately gives us freedom,
then we need to keep ourselves dry from these sinful activities.
So sexual pleasure is not being denied, but it should be used in Krishna consciousness,
as we have discussed many times before.
Eating is not denied, but the food, that food only should be taken, which is offered to Krishna.
So enjoying music is not denied, but we should enjoy kirtan,
the music which is there for the pleasure of Krishna.
In this way, we should take pleasure only in offering pleasure to Krishna.
Otherwise, if we take independent pleasure without pleasing Krishna,
then that kind of pleasure will generate moha, will generate illusion in this world.
And then how much ever we apply our brain, we will never be able to come to platform of knowledge.
Sanity is required. So that is why I request all of you,
please try to make your life simple and simple and try to keep yourself aloof.
Especially follow, let us try to follow the four regulatory principles very, very nicely.
No meat eating, no intoxication, no gambling, no illicit sex, no enjoyment.
And especially this phone, it is sufficient to help us break all regulatory principles easily.
So be very, very careful of this addiction.
No addiction should be there in the life of devotee.
Nothing should be compelling us to certain kind of activity.
So in this way, when a person is able to keep himself free,
then he can come to the platform of knowledge.
But obviously, it is not easy to follow this thing.
That is why varnashrama system is a gradual thing.
So don't worry, may not be in this life.
After hundreds of lifetimes, you will be able to understand hundreds and thousands of lifetimes.
So it takes very, very long time to understand self, understand God.
However, there is another process, a shortcut process.
So we may wonder, oh, I am also having so many addictions in my life.
It is very, very difficult to come out of it.
That is why another important word which is used in the shloka is madhanugrahaya paramam.
Anugrahaya means mercy.
So if Krishna is merciful, as we have discussed in the 4th shloka of Bhagavad Gita,
10th chapter, verse number 9, Lord Krishna mentions to Arjuna,
those devotees, aham sarvasse prabho matta sarvam pravartete,
who understand that Krishna is the source of all manifestation,
entire material world and spiritual world,
They are always discussing about me and they are always preaching Krishna Consciousness.
So Krishna tells finally in the 11th verse,
I am seated in the heart and I give knowledge from within the heart.
So spiritual knowledge is never the result of chance
that I will keep on following and by chance,
the spiritual knowledge will be revealed suddenly one day.
No, nothing happens by chance.
This is what we have to understand.
Not a blade of grass moves by chance.
Everything is strictly controlled under the laws of nature.
So the awakening, spiritual awakening,
when I am able to understand that I am eternal,
when I am realizing I am not the body,
when I am realizing who is God, God is a person,
when I am realizing the nature of this world.
So all these spiritual truths are revealed by Lord who is sitting within the heart.
Only when he is pleased with the devotees,
sincere attempts to advance in the devotional service in spiritual life.
So here Krishna explained this knowledge to Arjuna
and Arjuna is admitting being a part of the spiritual world.
You have shown me a great favor.
Just out of your mercy, you have shown me favor
and thus I am able to understand this knowledge.
I am able to come out of illusion.
So if you want to come out of all our shortcomings,
ordinarily it could have taken many, many lives for us to come to that platform of knowledge.
We can surpass all the shortcomings of our mind and body.
We can be Shudra or we can be less than Shudra.
Those who do not follow the systems of varnashrama,
they are called milichas and yavanas.
And actually all of us belong to that category.
We were never told to follow any system of varnashrama dharma.
So we are not even belonging,
we have no hope of spiritual advancement in this age.
But if we take shelter of Krishna,
we try to please Krishna,
this is the process of Krishna consciousness.
So always analyze in the day,
just like the person is analyzing,
a lover is analyzing,
how can I please my beloved?
What have I done to please him or her?
In a similar fashion, we can analyze.
So this past one hour,
what did I do to please Krishna?
And what did I do which has displeased Krishna?
How can I increase Krishna's pleasure in the upcoming hour?
In this way, every few minutes,
or every hour, every day we can analyze.
So today this activity I did which displeased Krishna,
this kind of sense enjoyment I did,
now tomorrow onwards I should try to restrict it,
try to curtail it.
So I chanted Krishna's name these many times
with this much attention,
tomorrow with more attention,
and more number of times I can try to do.
In this way, let me try to please Krishna.
Yesterday I became very proud, I became angry,
not understanding every living entity's part and parcel of Krishna.
So tomorrow let me show respect to all the living entities,
seeing them as temple of God,
because God is living as Parmatma in all the bodies.
So every body, not just human body,
but even non-moving bodies, even plant bodies,
should be offered respect as temple.
That is the verdict of the Vedas.
This is the real understanding.
God is sitting in the heart.
Although we are not seeing, it does not matter.
We have to understand from the Vedas.
So God is sitting in every body.
So every body, man, human, animal,
we cannot just save human beings
and call that I have to be human and I am killing animals.
No, that is also temple.
Every body should be respected at all times.
So tomorrow to please Krishna,
I will offer respect to anybody that I see,
seeing that it's temple of the Lord.
In this way I should read and I should think,
how can I apply this knowledge of Bhagavad Gita
in my life to please Krishna more?
So when I am sincerely always thinking
and acting to please Krishna,
by Krishna's mercy, the revelation,
realization of all these facts which we are doing,
we can perceive it as practical fact, practical reality.
So only by mercy of Krishna,
the moha, the illusion is destroyed in one's life.
And when the illusion is destroyed,
after this, as Arjuna is telling here,
I have realized this Krishna.
Oh lotus-eyed one, I have heard from you in detail
about the appearance and disappearance of every living entity.
So now Arjuna is not talking birth and death,
appearance and disappearance.
He has realized the living entities are eternal.
They take a dress and they appear,
become visible in our dimension
and then they vanish from our dimension.
They become invisible to us
in the mundane three dimensions.
So the living entities, they appear and then they disappear.
So Krishna has explained to Arjuna this fact.
As realized, he has realized this fact by mercy of Krishna
through your inexhaustible glories.
Now he wants to understand about Krishna,
Arjuna is telling.
So this word yathaata is very important.
Yathaata means as, yathaata means as it is.
So Krishna expands himself into unlimited forms.
So many forms Krishna has taken.
As Vishnu-tattva, supreme personality
and all of us are also expansions of Krishna's form only.
But we are infinitesimal expansion
and Krishna expands himself as godly forms also
and as living entities like us also.
But infinite forms are infinitesimal.
All the forms that we see are expansions
from this original form of Krishna.
It is not that Lord Krishna has expanded
or his incarnation of Vishnu
that is explained very beautifully in this chapter.
We will see in the coming verses.
And Arjuna has explained here also clearly
that Krishna, this form which I am seeing
that is yathaata, that is as it is.
Though I see here before me your actual position.
So Arjuna is completely convinced
this is the actual position of God,
the actual form which I am seeing.
But still he wants to see another form,
the form which Krishna takes
when he enters this material universe.
So at the end of this display of universal form
which is going to happen,
Lord Krishna explains that this two-handed form
of Krishna is the topmost
and the Vishnu form is an expansion
from this two-handed form.
So that sloka will come,
we will discuss more about it when we read that.
So here we see today that
any person who has started a spiritual organization
or even he has not started,
people are very fond of calling themselves God,
that I am God.
And every other person,
every other so-called saint,
he is telling I am incarnation of God.
So Arjuna was knowing that
these things are going to happen in future.
So that is why in order to re-establish
this fact that Krishna is God,
he requests Krishna,
please show me that form,
how you have entered in this universe
and expanded yourself in various forms.
That is called universal form.
Just like this soul enters
into the sperm cell
and the cells combine together,
the chemicals and they develop
and this form is manifest.
In a similar fashion,
when Krishna enters this material universe,
so many forms manifest.
Our bodies are also existing
because Krishna has entered
within this universe.
Just like as the soul enters this body,
then so many germs, worms, bacteria,
they also survive in this body.
But all those forms will be destroyed
when the main soul,
the occupier of this body,
leaves the body.
In a similar fashion,
if Krishna in his form of Lord Vishnu
leaves this universe,
none of the things will exist,
no forms will exist in the universe.
So when Lord Krishna enters in this universe,
this universe develops
so many forms.
And this aggregates some total
of all the forms of the universe.
It is called universal form of Krishna,
Aishwarya, which is full of all
the magnificent opulences.
So in order to avoid
such imposters who can claim that
I am also God,
here Krishna is being requested by Arjuna
please just to guide the general masses
so that they don't get cheated in future.
In future if somebody tells I am God,
we can request them.
Can you please show your universal form
of Krishna shown here in the Bhagavad Gita
if they are able to show that
the entire universe is lying in their body,
then we can take them as God
and not otherwise.
So although,
although I see here before me your actual position,
I yet wish to see how
you have entered into this cosmic manifestation.
If you think that I am able
to behold your cosmic form,
O my Lord, who master of all
mystic power, then kindly
show me that universal self.
So this is also very important.
So Arjuna is pleading Krishna
that Krishna kindly,
if you see that I am
able to see this form,
if I am qualified then you please show it to me.
In other words, Krishna
is being requested by Arjuna,
please show me, do me this special favor.
Make me qualified.
So we have to understand with these
eyes we have but very limited
perception. We have certain
rods and cones in the eyes
by which we are able to see the colors
in this world. When that ratio of
rods and cones is disturbed, people become color
blind. They are not able to see exact
colors also. And some
people they become, they develop cataract,
they are not able to see properly, some of them
become completely blind, so then
they cannot see any form. So in
this manner, the way we are seeing this world,
we are perceiving this world, and
those who are students of, you have read
basic mathematics,
so then we can understand, as
we saw in the Mantra Yoga and Jigyasa
sessions, the 2D, 3D
video, if there is infinite
cylinder, if it is projected
in a 2D plane, that infinite
cylinder can be perceived as a disc
or a circle
only. So
the living entities who can just see
two dimensional forms, they can
never understand what
is a cylinder like. Cylinder is a
three dimensional thing, just like we cannot
imagine what an object
of four dimension would
look like. We only can
conceive objects, personalities,
things of three dimensions.
Length, breadth and height, what is four dimension?
So in a similar
fashion, if
any cylinder
which can be infinite in nature,
but infinite cylinder, when it crosses
the 2D plane, it will be perceived
as a small disc, smaller
big, depends upon the radius
of the cylinder. In a similar fashion,
when Krishna comes to our world,
we perceive Krishna as a
limited form, just like infinite cylinder
appears to be a finite disc.
In a similar fashion, unlimited
Krishna appears to be a limited
form, but then it shows this form.
Yasodha is seeing all the universes,
here Krishna shows the same
thing to Arjuna. Arjuna also sees not just
one, but all the universes in the body
of Krishna. Infinite
within the finite. So thus, what is
the capacity of our eyes? We can just
perceive three dimensions, and limited
things, very limited things in even those
three dimensions. So Arjuna is
requesting, if at all you feel I
can see, please show me that form.
So Krishna understanding the
heart of his devotee.
Sri Bhagavan Vacha, Lord Krishna
says,
The Blessed Lord said,
My dear Arjuna, O son of Pritha,
behold now, my opulences,
hundreds of thousands of very divine
forms, multicoloured,
like the sea. So hundreds
and thousands of forms, because
all those forms are Krishna's
expansions, only that we see.
So now you see thousands, hundreds
and thousands of forms, multicoloured
like the sea.
Pashya dityan vasun rudran ashvinau marutas tatha bahunya
drishta purvani pashyas charyani bharata.
O best of the Bharata, see here the different manifestations
of Adityas, Rudras, and all the demigods.
Behold the many things which no one has ever seen or heard
before.
So this form, nobody had ever seen or heard before, which is
being displayed to Arjuna now here.
And Krishna is telling, now you can see all the Adityas,
Rudras.
So these are Rudra, the expansions of Lord Shiva.
Aditya is a category of demigods who are the sons of Aditi.
Like this, the demigods have some categories,
as we have seen in previous chapter also.
So all these demigods are huge and very, very powerful
personalities.
They regulate the motion of air, fire,
and all these elements.
So now you can see all these powerful personalities
within my form.
And all the demigods, behold many things
which no one has ever seen or heard before.
Like what?
Iha ekastham jagat krishnam pashyadhyasacharacharam
mamadehe gudakesha yacchanya drishtum ichchasi.
Whatever you wish to see can be seen all at once in this body.
This universal form can show you all that you now desire,
as well as whatever you may desire in the future.
Everything is here completely.
So just see.
So nobody can see entire universe sitting at one place.
What to speak of universe?
We cannot perceive everything of this planet.
We are somehow trying to gather some knowledge of some balls
which are floating in there, which are closest to Earth.
What to speak of perceiving the universe?
And here Krishna is giving Arjuna the power
to see entire universe just sitting in one place,
and not just the present structure of the universe.
Past, present, and future.
This universal form can show you all that you now desire,
as well as whatever you may desire in future.
So everything can be completely perceived.
East, west, north, south, up, down, past, present, future.
Everything can be perceived sitting in one place.
So just see, this is how, this is Krishna's existence.
This is also one way of perceiving the world.
This is the way in which very powerful personalities
are able to see.
That is why such powerful sages
have composed these scriptures,
as we discussed in mantra yoga and jigyasa sessions.
The predictions, how beautifully they are predicting,
very with great precision,
what is going to happen after 1,000 years,
3,000 years, 5,000 years, 500,000 years.
Everything is being predicted very, very precisely,
because they can see past, present, and future
sitting in one place.
So now Krishna is offering this vision to Arjuna.
You can see entire universe, past, present, and future also.
But Krishna tells to Arjuna,
But you cannot see me with your present eyes,
therefore I give to you divine eyes
by which you can behold my mystic opulence.
So with these present eyes, you cannot see that form.
Therefore I give to you the divine eyes,
by which you can behold my mystic opulence.
So do we read in Mahabharata or in Bhagavad Gita here
or any place else, that Krishna removed the eye of Arjuna
and he put another set of eyes?
No.
So thus, Krishna has changed the eyes mystically.
So in a similar fashion, with these eyes,
if you want to understand Krishna with our present senses,
we want to see Krishna with these eyes,
we want to hear the nectarian pleasure,
we want to enjoy that pleasure of chanting Krishna's name,
we want to get this extraordinary pleasure
in tasting Krishna prasadam, we want
to understand everything about Krishna consciousness,
about soul, super soul, spiritual world.
It is not possible with this material mind,
with these material eyes, ears, material body.
So that is why when a person takes initiation
from the spiritual master, his body changes.
If a person is completely surrendered,
the material body cracks apart
and spiritual body is given immediately.
This transformation happens, although a person may not
realize with his mundane senses.
But this is how, this is the system of the initiation.
When a person completely surrenders to spiritual master,
then immediately the body is transformed.
Just like Arjuna's eyes are transformed,
the spiritual vision is given to Arjuna.
In a similar fashion, the person is able to appreciate
spiritual subject matter, taste it, see it, hear it,
understand it, when the mind and body is spiritualized
by surrendering to spiritual master.
So thus we should not worry much if I'm not able
to see, taste, hear or perceive or understand now.
We have to keep on following the process with purification
as we surrender, the body gets changed,
the body gets spiritualized, and then the person is able
to behold, understand Krishna as he reveals himself.
So what is this revelation?
What all Arjuna is able to see in that universal form,
we will see in the next class.
So for now, let us try to purify ourselves
by chanting this Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
This is the process of changing our body
from material to spiritual platform.
And this is most important,
please take this process very, very carefully.
If you're not careful in this chanting process,
whatever else we do, it will fail,
will not be much successful.
And although there are so many activities recommended
in spiritual life, the foundation is shavanam,
hearing attentively.
So please do not neglect, be very, very respectful,
be very, very attentive, just like Arjuna is pleading.
So this Hare Krishna Maha Mantra is also
pleading prayer to Krishna.
That is why the Brahmanas voluntarily keep themselves
poverty-stricken, because when a person is having
so much resources, then it depends on his resources,
then on Krishna.
When a person is bereft of the resources,
he goes to temple, approaches Krishna.
So Brahmana voluntarily keeps himself
in a very tight situation, poverty-stricken situation.
So in a helpless mood, in a pleading mood,
we should chant Hare Krishna Maha Mantra.
I have fallen into this material world.
I am completely intoxicated by sense enjoyment,
completely in moha, illusion, bewilderment.
Krishna, please take me out from this suffering.
So in this mood, in this pleading way,
hearing each and every word attentively,
understanding Krishna is coming,
in this way chanting has to be done.
So let us now try to do this process.
Please do it very sincerely.
And after this, we will take up questions and answers.
So it is very simple, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna,
Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Ram, Hare Ram,
Ram, Ram, Hare Hare.
