So Krishna gave divine eyes to Arjuna and we also understood divine vision does not mean
changing these organs, but the nature of the organs has changed.
So the same eyes got converted into divine eyes and thus Arjuna was able to see.
So our eyes are able to conceive the world in a certain way which may not be the actual way the world is manifest.
In a certain way all the living entities perceive the world. They see, hear, touch, understand, analyze and they have their own conclusions.
So in order to give the real understanding of this universe to Arjuna, Krishna gave this divine vision
Usually we think it is just matter which is manifest but Krishna wanted to show Arjuna, no it is me who am manifest through all the matter.
And thus Krishna was able to display all the matter that is there in the universe within his body because actually entire thing is entire universe is Krishna's body.
Just like in our body we have many many I have explained before but I expect some people would be new so I am repeating again.
Just like in our body we have so many cells and every cell is a living entity.
There are so many germs in the body, so many worms in the body, bacteria in the body, they are all living entities and they have their individual bodies.
But we as a soul unless we live in this body all those other small living entities they cannot have their individual existence, they cannot maintain their individual bodies.
So actually this entire body is our form and within this body small forms are also there which belong to small living entities who are part and parcel of this body.
In a similar fashion when Krishna enters in this universe, this universe develops all the forms that we see.
Mountains, rivers, trees, grass, herbs, human beings, animals, birds, angels, demons, ghosts, all such forms they manifest.
But all these forms are dependent upon the form of Krishna because he is present in the universe.
Now because this entire universe is Krishna's body, thus Krishna can show in his body and it is not that universal form displayed two handed Krishna's form.
That we also saw in the previous class Arjuna explains to Krishna.
Although I know this is as it is original form of yours, what I see before me, two handed form.
But still how do you enter in this universe material world? I want to see that form. Please show it to me.
So this universal form is subordinate to form of Krishna. Thus Krishna was able to display because this universe is Krishna's body.
Somebody asks us that can I please meet you personally? Can I see you?
Then we can show because this body is ours. We can show him completely. Look, this is what I am. You can meet me.
So in a similar fashion when Arjuna requested Krishna to see his universal form, Krishna displayed, see this is my form.
So Arjuna asked this because it has been the trend and especially in Kali Yuga it is very very predominant.
Everyone claims I am God. This philosophy is rampant. I am God. You are God. Everyone is God. We just have to realize we are God.
So this is not a sane philosophy because if you are God, why you are suffering? Why God should take any suffering here?
And so many other things are there which are beautifully presented in Bhagavad Gita.
So to avoid these imposters who can declare that I am God, Krishna showed to Arjuna his universal form. Arjuna requested for our guidance.
So anybody who tells that he is God, he should show us how he has entered the universe and he should show entire universe, past, present and future in his body.
Which is what now Arjuna is getting divine eyes and now he will be able to behold that wonderful manifestation of Krishna.
And what is this manifestation that we will see now.
Sanjaya said, O King, speaking thus the Supreme, the Lord of all mystic power, the personality of Godhead displayed his universal form to Arjuna.
Arjuna saw in that universal form unlimited mouths and unlimited eyes.
It was all wondrous. The form was decorated with divine dazzling ornaments and arrayed in many garbs.
He was garlanded gloriously and there were many scents smeared over his body. All was magnificent, all expanding, unlimited.
This was seen by Arjuna. So Arjuna saw in this form unlimited mouths, unlimited eyes.
So although this material world is just one-fourth of all the manifestation of the existence, three-fourth is a spiritual world, still Arjuna is telling it is unlimited.
If hundreds of thousands of suns rose up at once into the sky, they might resemble the effulgence of the Supreme Person in that universal form.
So this form is being explained by Sanjaya to the King Dhritarashtra.
So how Sanjaya was able to see Arjuna is watching there on the battlefield of Kurukshetra. So this is technology.
So now we are very expert in creating things by our research work, but actually the nature already has all such arrangement.
So we take the guidance from the Vedic literatures. So Srila Prabhupada explains, nothing is extricate of no use by chance in this world.
Everything is there with a purpose. So people are very fond of calling something as vestigial in our body, vestigial organ of no use.
And as we have discussed in the Jigyasa sessions that the pituitary gland, which is the master gland, that also was considered once vestigial.
The most important gland of the body was declared vestigial by the medical scientists, and now they realize it is most important gland of the body.
Similarly, now spiritual knowledge. Now people are realizing of course gradually, but for a long time it was declared vestigial.
No use. What is the use of this spiritual knowledge? And Prabhupada would go to West.
The Westerners were hearing nicely and Indian student asked Prabhupada or Swamiji, whatever they would call at that time.
So what is the use of this Hare Krishna? We need technology now. This is why where our country is lagging.
So Prabhupada told you have come here like a beggar to beg, teach me this thing, give me this thing.
I have come here to give you the highest technology, the technology, the science of that consciousness, which is the most important substance element of this body.
So, so long this subject matter has been taken as vestigial, but now people are realizing that despite advancement in all the fields of knowledge, only misery is increasing in life.
So in this way, every portion of this body has got a use. Nothing is vestigial.
We are not able to understand the use, correlate the use. So we tell it is of no use.
Just like blind person tells I do not see anything. So nothing exists. It is not wisdom. How can you say it is vestigial?
It is height of arrogance. You can tell we do not know what is the use of this organ in the body.
Vestigial remove it. It is of no use. So all these things are going on in the name of knowledge, but that is not knowledge.
Knowledge is the Vedas. So as we discussed without any labs, how people were able to figure out the right medicine, they would take out the right route.
Some kind of fruit is poison for one person and the same is medicine for another.
And how the right dosage has to be given at the right time it has to be given. So everything is very nicely mentioned over there.
There is no mention and there was no practice of doing experiments as we for eight or ten years it takes a medicine to come out in the market.
They experiment on the rats, on the frogs, on human beings like that. So there is no question of experiment.
So without experimentation, without research, a person has knowledge how he has got the knowledge because it has come from the creator.
Prabhupada gives example. There is a route. If you simply test that route on any of the ailing tooth, it would suck out all the bacteria which are causing the problem.
So there is a significance of the route. Similarly, as I had mentioned before,
when I was speaking to the director of a museum,
so he was telling and he was very much fascinated, very interested in Bhagavad Gita and Vedas.
So I asked him, what is your reason? No, no, I have very strong faith in it.
I personally saw it that how all these sages have wonderful knowledge.
He gives some description and then he also gave interesting.
We came to discussion of Ayurveda. So he explained that they had gone to Pachmuri.
It's a place in MP when he was in school, school or college, whatever.
So along with his batch mates, they were there camping.
And then these two people, he and his friend, they drifted from the main group and they came down and to the forest area and there they met a yogi.
And he was living there and they asked him that you are living here.
And of course, when we wonder that, you know, we have to have kitchen in our house, we eat.
How do you manage eating here in the jungle? How do you cook? How do you manage?
So he told, I'll show you. So he brought a route.
He cut it into small pieces and he offered it to them. You please eat it.
You will understand. So they got scared. Who is this person offering us something to eat?
We should not accept food from strangers. So he understood that they are hesitant.
So he ate something, a couple of pieces himself, and then he offered.
Now you can take it safe. So as soon as they took it, some fraud started coming out of it in the mouth.
So they got very scared. So immediately they puked it out and then they went back to their camp.
But whatever little they could eat or swallow, their hunger vanished.
And in the camp they are eating. They did not take anything on that day. So that was fine.
Then there was second meal. They did not take second meal also.
Then there was third meal of the day. They did not take that also.
So the camp in charge, he got worried. Is your health all right? What has happened to you?
And they were hesitant to tell because they had drifted apart from the main group.
But then they explained this is how what happened.
We went to see that person and we just took a little bit, a small piece of it that we did not take it inside.
But this is the effect of this thing. It completely takes off hunger from your body.
So immediately next day, entire camp was there down in the forest, but they could not spot that person.
So like this, many, many things are there. So that is why Ayurveda, just like we understand from the Ramayan,
that unique booty was required. Lord Hanuman went there. It was found in that particular mountain range.
So like this, everything has been created in nature by Krishna's arrangement, but we do not know how to use it.
Just like today there is one devotee explained to me, there is another feature in Zoom and so many features are there.
I was not knowing and we were thinking how to implement this thing, but these things already exist.
You need to have knowledge from the creator or the person who has received this knowledge.
So in a similar fashion, there is no need to send a satellite somewhere and do really monitoring everything.
This thing can be achieved by the Vedic process also.
So all the sages who are advanced in this knowledge, time and space, they don't stop their vision.
And Ved Vyas is such a similar powerful personality. He could see past, present and future.
And Sanjay being his disciple, he was given mercy, power by his spiritual master.
So Sanjay was able to envision, although he was sitting in the palace, he was able to envision everything what was happening on the battlefield.
And being a pure devotee, he also was able to understand and see all these things which were being shown to Arjuna and the Sanjay is describing.
So this television is there in the heart. So this is what is Krishna Consciousness.
So when we advance in Krishna Consciousness, it is being explained.
Whatever it is happening, not just in the material world, much beyond the range of the material world in the spiritual domain, what is happening?
Everything can be seen in the heart 24 hours.
So Krishna's activities are displayed like we see in television.
It is constantly being seen in the heart of a devotee.
So this is called Samadhi. Devotee is completely absorbed in the pastimes of Krishna.
But all these things in Kali Yoga can be revealed simply by chanting.
We simply have to chant and hear nicely. And this holy name, first the holy name will make us understand that holy name is non-different from Krishna.
And then further the holy name will reveal everything.
Holy name reveals the form of Krishna. Holy name reveals the qualities of Krishna.
Holy name reveals the associates of Krishna, pastimes of Krishna.
Gradually in step by step process, all these things are revealed simply by the holy name.
But somehow we are not able to, we are so fallen.
And because of past sinful activities, we are not able to understand that holy name is Krishna only.
If I chant Hare Krishna, Radha and Krishna are immediately present.
I am in contact with God, the origin of the universe immediately.
But this is difficult to understand.
So somehow if we are able to, even though I am not able to see, understanding we are blind.
Arjuna could see everything I am not seeing.
So I should not depend upon my vision, but depend upon scriptures.
All the suffering in our life is just because of ignorance.
Praupad was explaining in the morning we are hearing Bhagavatam class.
So hearing Bhagavatam is very very important every day.
So all the devotees till the time of their death, they hear Bhagavatam every day as much as possible throughout the day.
But specially in the morning.
Morning and evening should be packed with Krishna consciousness.
Get up early in the morning, do Mangala Aarti, chant Hare Krishna Maha Mantra, read, hear Bhagavatam.
And evening same thing, Kirtan and hearing and reading.
In between the daytime you do your activities.
So this is our recreation, Krishna consciousness.
Save time from all other mundane time pass engagements we have created.
Morning and evening completely absorbed in Krishna consciousness.
Then daytime also we will be able to continue in that consciousness.
So Praupad was explaining in the morning in today's Bhagavatam class that how because of ignorance his neighbour died.
Praupad was a householder before.
He took sannyas and eventually preached.
So Praupad explained that this neighbour he ate too much of fried pakodas and they were fried in oil.
So now these people they got scared.
As it came in couple of years ago it was there in the newspaper.
One of the biggest blunders of medical science that they told ghee is causing cholesterol and heart attacks.
And this refined oil is very good.
And now they are telling this refined oil is cancerous.
It is very poisonous for the body.
And this ghee is very very good.
So now everybody is consuming ghee.
Of course from a right source and in that way.
But Ayurveda always says that ghee is for the inside and oil is for the outside.
But somehow they changed this thing.
So this person it was fried in oil and this person ate too much of pakodas fried in oil.
And then he suffered from cholera and eventually died.
So why this happened?
This person was thinking pakoda is very nice.
It is enjoyment.
But he did not know that excess of this pakoda is the cause of my death.
In a similar fashion the scriptures explain us since enjoyment can be enjoyed only to the extent of keeping body and soul together in the service of Krishna.
So for keeping body and soul together some Krishna prasadam you can eat not for enjoyment.
The moment we indulge in luxury then finished.
So all the physical pleasures watching hearing touching sleeping they are required procreation.
It is also required only for producing children.
As soon as we think oh let me now enjoy for pleasure then we are finished.
Then the same sensual activities kill us which are required for sustaining life.
The same activity becomes deadly and it is responsible for our death life after life.
So this is ignorance from which we are suffering.
Then Srila Prabhupada explained how a child is there.
Child is completely in ignorance.
A small child is like animal.
Animal simply needs food.
Child also it cries when it is hungry.
You simply give food to child and child is happy smiling or sleeping just like animal.
But by Krishna's mercy in human form we are able to elevate ourselves in consciousness.
Slowly he starts recognizing other things.
He starts talking, he develops language, perception, comprehension.
Then that is why it is told as soon as a child becomes around five years of age
he should be immediately instructed in Shrimad Bhagavatam.
So this knowledge should be practiced from the childhood.
But nevertheless even though we have missed it hearing from the childhood the process is very powerful.
Now if we take to it very very sincerely we also can attain success in the process.
So child is ignorant and when the child grows up.
So again Prabhupada was explaining very nice example from his life.
So Prabhupada explained I can remember I asked my mother.
So mother how have I come in this world.
So mother explained from my body how from your body I have come out from where I have come out.
So Prabhupada told my mother showed the navel from here you have come out.
So child does not know his origin from where he has come.
And mother is telling you came out so how such a body can come out.
Big body from mother and mother is showing navel.
He is not able to understand.
But when the child grows up then he understands everything.
So in a similar fashion when we grow in our consciousness then we are able to understand everything.
In lower modes in tamoguna how much ever a small child tries to think comprehend he has his limitation.
If he is very small just a small kid cannot even come out of his cradle then he can simply he is just like animal.
He cannot understand anything.
There is no question in a similar fashion in order to understand higher subject matters truth science of consciousness science of God one needs to elevate his consciousness.
And understand this knowledge about the universe from the Vedas.
So we cannot figure out our coming into this world how we can understand this entire universe how it has come into existence.
So that is why the Vedas give the knowledge.
So the Vedas are so perfect as we just discussed the example of Ayurveda and so many other things.
And how wonderful predictions we have seen.
Everything is so nicely mentioned.
That person's name would be Buddha.
He will be a prince.
He will be born in a Kshatriya family.
And mother's name is Anjana.
He will be born in Gaya province which is there around in Bihar.
So all these things are very nicely mentioned and so many other things.
So this knowledge is coming from God.
So if we read very nicely then we can get all the perfect knowledge.
And just like Sanjay was able to envision this knowledge tells us how we can personally see the activities of God within our heart constantly.
And that is what satisfies a living entity.
Okay, let us continue.
Then bewildered and astonished, his hair standing on end, Arjuna began to pray with folded hands offering obeisances to the Supreme Lord.
Arjuna said,
My dear Lord Krishna, I see assembled together in your body all the demigods and various other living entities.
I see Brahma sitting on the lotus flower as well as Lord Shiva and many sages and divine serpents.
So Arjuna was able to see Lord Brahma who was the first person as Vedas explain in the universe and how Brahma came out.
Brahma came out from so Lord's body so big so huge compared to us that within his navel there is a lake.
The water is there deposited on his navel from that lake.
Just like the lakes produce flowers that lake produces a lotus flower and on that flower Lord Brahma appears manifests himself.
And that Lord Vishnu he is lying on a serpent body that is called Vasuki.
Although there are other Vasuki snakes also there is a category.
So that snake bed of Krishna is also known by the name of Vasuki.
So all these things Arjuna was able to see in the universe the form of Lord Vishnu who is called Garbhodakshay Vishnu from whom whose navel Lord Brahma comes out.
Lord Shiva also he was able to see who came out of the forehead of Lord Brahma and all the other sages and divine serpents.
Oh Lord of the universe I see in your universal body many many forms bellies, mouths, eyes expanded without limit.
There is no end there is no beginning and there is no middle to all this.
Your form adorned with various crowns, clubs and discs is difficult to see because of its glaring effulgence which is fiery and immeasurable like the sun.
So many crowns are there so many clubs are there because various other powerful living entities are there.
So nothing is happening by chance just like we are getting water supply from the municipal corporation.
We are getting the roads are being maintained and the groceries are being given and so many other things.
Now in this time vaccines are being arranged nothing is happening by chance.
There is proper arrangement there are proper ministries although small child cannot understand this.
Similarly we should not become so arrogant that me small living entity what I don't understand it is vestigial.
No so that's when the child grows up he understands and I remember from my instance when I was child and father would tell that you know Sarkar is doing this thing.
And Sarkar gives salary Sarkar maintains.
So I thought the Sarkar is some woman who is controlling everything.
So then later I realized what is the Sarkar who is giving salary who is maintaining and doing everything.
It is a combination of so many other people.
They are called ministers and the ministers are responsible for all the affairs.
It is not by chance in a similar fashion when a person advances in consciousness.
He can understand and he can see also all these Devas the celestial persons who are very huge in size very powerful in strength.
And all these various personalities are also expansions of Krishna our bodies also expansion of Krishna's body.
Everything in this world is expansion of Krishna's energy only.
So Arjun was able to see all these various forms having various crowns gloves disks and they are all effulgent.
So our bodies also emitting light but that is infrared snake can see we are emitting reddish light.
We are not able to see just like a glover also emits light in a similar fashion.
The higher living entities they are very effulgent.
So Arjuna was able to see all these glaring effulgent forms having their crowns gloves and disks and other weapons.
You are the supreme primal objective.
You are the best in all the universes.
You are inexhaustible and you are the oldest.
You are the maintainer of religion the eternal personality of Godhead.
You are the origin without beginning middle or end.
You have numberless arms and the sun and moon are among your great unlimited eyes by your own radiance.
You are heating this entire universe.
So the great effulgence that we see of the sun coming out.
We don't know the personality who is responding who is responsible for creating this effulgence in a similar fashion.
Ultimately from where that personality is giving is getting the power to create this effulgence.
So here Arjuna is able to see that Krishna is the source of all the effulgence all the light radiation
and he is eating the entire universe by Krishna's radiance.
Although you are one you are spread throughout the sky and the planets and all space between.
Oh great one as I behold this terrible form I see that all the planetary systems are perplexed.
So this is very important statement.
All the planetary systems.
So the planetary systems are divided into three layers top planets middle planets where we belong and then other regions lower planets.
So everywhere in all the planetary systems people are perplexed.
So here she left our path explains nicely.
They are a part of your whole means the space between heaven and earth.
And look at the three worlds are significant words in this was because it appears that not only Arjuna saw this universal form of the Lord
but others in other planetary systems also saw it.
The vision was not a dream.
All who are spiritually awake with the divine visions saw it.
So thus it was not a dream because others also are able to envision this form.
Although Sanjay is sitting in his palace Sanjay is also able to see the form and all the living entities who are spiritually awake with this divine vision.
So thus two things are required.
First of all a person should not be blind.
If a person is blind then even the most beautiful person can come and stand in front of him.
He won't be able to see it.
But even though the person has vision the other person also should agree to come and meet display his form.
So in a similar fashion we have to prepare ourselves and always keep ourselves in the spiritual platform.
And when Krishna is pleased he will display himself to us.
So all those who are spiritually awake as soon as Krishna displayed his form immediately they were all able to see and they also got perplexed
because as Krishna has explained to Arjuna this form was never shown to anybody before.
Why it was not shown that we will discuss very soon.
So when they saw this form which they had never seen before because so many terrible forms also Krishna has
and the different Rudra expansions which are so furious as soon as they came into existence
their strength and their attitude is just to destroy whatever they see.
So this happens in Tamoguna.
Creation happens in Rajaguna mode of passion.
That is a passionate people are able to create companies and buildings and everything.
But one side effect of mode of passion is disturbance.
So that is why all these people who create things they are always disturbed in their life.
Always anxious.
Satvaguna means maintenance.
So Lord Vishnu has taken charge of maintaining personally.
And Tamoguna means destruction.
Lord Shiva has taken charge of Tamoguna.
So when also we also come in Tamoguna we become angry we become lusty we destroy the things.
So as soon as Lord Shiva created his Rudra expansions they immediately started destroying all the universe.
And that also has got a purpose because destruction is also required just like the old building is destroyed.
And you put dynamites and so many other things so that new building can be created or you bring bulldozer.
It is not easy no ordinary person can shake the building.
So if the entire universe has to be destroyed it needs extraordinary power.
So this responsibility is given to Lord Shiva.
And how do we get power this also actually people are completely unaware.
So how do we get power we get power by tapasya.
Now there is no concept of tapasya thus there is no ruler in this place.
The kings got vanished all so many people coming together in government coalition government.
This also does not run for a long time.
Earlier just one person would be able to rule on entire globe for many many years hundreds of years because they were strong by power of tapasya.
So tapasya makes a person powerful otherwise a person is powerless helplessly being pushed by laws of nature.
And every day feels helpless. This is happening in my life.
I'm not able to do anything so helpless because there is no tapasya in life.
So thus Prabhupada has introduced the system of tapasya.
Tapasya begins in the day with Mangala Aarti in the Brahmurta one and a half hours before sunrise.
You should get up in the morning and take cold water bath and then force your mind control your mind to hear each and every mantra attentively.
So in this way our tapasya begins follow four regulated principles and few other things.
So the more we do tapasya Brahmacharya the more we become powerful material or spiritual powers depends what we want that will be manifest.
But tapasya is required for power. So that is why we see always Lord Shiva is sitting in meditation.
Why is sitting in meditation? So two things are there.
So of course he's a devotee devotee anyway has to meditate.
But Lord Brahma ordered Lord Shiva to meditate upon the Supreme Personality which is required both for self realization and also for developing power.
Now you have to have tremendous power because at the time of universal annihilation your services would be called for.
So now you please stop all your expansions. Don't do this destruction.
Now is the time for creation. You go for tapasya.
So Lord Shiva being the son for Brahma agreed and thus he's always meditating sitting in tapasya.
And thus he accumulates so much of power so that he can eventually destroy this entire material universe.
So like this many powerful living entities are there who are living in various parts of the universe.
And when we advance in our consciousness we can understand it.
So all those living entities who are powerful enough who are spiritually awakened as soon as this form was displayed
which included many other these rudra and many other ghastly forms they got perplexed by seeing all these things.
And then what happens?
All the demigods are surrendering and entering into you.
They are very much afraid and with folded hands they are singing the Vedic hymns.
So all the demigods are surrendering and entering into you.
They are very much afraid. So all those who could see the form and with folded hands they are singing the Vedic hymns.
The different manifestations of Lord Shiva, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Vishwadevas, the two Ashwins, the Maruts, the forefathers and the Gandharvas,
the Yakshas, Asuras and all perfected demigods are beholding you in wonder.
Oh mighty armed one, all the planets with their demigods are disturbed at seeing your many faces, eyes, arms, bellies and legs and your terrible teeth.
And as they are disturbed, so am I.
Oh all-pervading Vishnu, I can no longer maintain my equilibrium.
Seeing your radiant colors fill the skies and beholding your eyes and mouths, I am afraid.
Oh lord of the lords, oh refuge of the worlds, please be gracious to me.
I cannot keep my balance. Seeing thus your blazing, death-like faces and awful teeth, in all directions I am bewildered.
So Krishna has got many, many ghastly forms. So the form in which we want to see Krishna, Krishna will manifest.
So the description is being given. Some forms are so horrible that Rakshasas are anyway very, very dangerous to look at.
But this Rakshasa army who are man-eaters led by Ramana, so when they attacked Yamraj even, Yampuri, and their Yamdutas were there and so many other ghastly forms who are punishing the sinful living entities.
So Ramana enters there and he sees how everybody is crying they are being punished and they started attacking the Yamdutas.
So the Yamraj got to know and Yamraj has a huge chariot having thousands of wheels and he was standing with the rod of death, Yamdanda and dead personified.
And when the Yamraj's chariot it came it moved and all of them they got so much disturbed by seeing they got so much scared that all the demons they started running here and there.
So the Rakshasas also got scared seeing those forms. So Krishna has got all these amazing manifestations.
He is more than the most beautiful, most loving person and if somebody wants to become Krishna's enemy, Krishna humbly reciprocates as an enemy also.
But whether Krishna is enemy or whether Krishna is friend in both ways it is beneficial.
So thus it is mentioned in Bhagavatam to the devotees Krishna delivers by his personal loving affairs he comes and takes them back out of birth and death to spiritual world.
And those who are demons they will become more and more envious of Krishna and create more and more suffering for their living entities and thus they will suffer because of reactions.
Krishna comes and kills them personally. So these bodies which are so much tamasic and they will create troubles for themselves only by breaking laws of nature.
Krishna gives them relief by killing and they are also liberated by the touch of Krishna.
So whether Krishna is enemy or whether Krishna is friend, Krishna is in every way beneficial for us.
But the devotee does not like to become enemy of Krishna because if enemy can get liberated then what is the position of devotee?
What such advanced platform, an amazing platform is awaiting for the devotees?
So thus a devotee is not selfish. I just want to get liberated. He wants to serve Krishna and Krishna also being a person he reciprocates very specially giving a very extraordinary position to the devotees.
And what is that extraordinary position? So this is explained very nicely and this verse is quoted many times by Srila Prabhupada.
So this verse comes in the 10th canto of Bhagavatam where Krishna's activities are being described.
So the Krishna's pastimes are described that along with his cowherds, friends, gopas he goes to the jungle, forest and then he plays very nicely.
They imitate the cooing of the birds and the jumping of the peacocks.
They imitate frogs and all these amazing creatures of jungle and they produce some sounds and then the echo is coming from the trees.
And in this way all the wonderful things that the boys are doing.
So this thing is being described and then they are playing with Krishna.
Sometimes Krishna is riding on their shoulders. Sometimes they are riding on the shoulders of Krishna.
So in this way all these wonderful activities are going.
But these activities are mentioned in the 10th canto. First we are supposed to finish Bhagavatam.
All this description of Krishna is given here. Bhagavad Gita, what is given here, what we are reading and then a person is supposed to read Bhagavatam.
Bhagavatam first describes this entire material universe, the fundamental science of creation, the fundamental physics, fundamental energies, few things of biology.
And all these things are mentioned so that a person can understand what is this creation.
And then there would be appreciation. Oh, this person has created all this thing.
So that is why Bhagavatam tells, very nice shloka.
So when the consciousness of a person is elevated, he comes to Brahminical position.
He understands I am not the body. And when he is very high in Satpugana, he can perfectly realize this position that I am not the body.
And they understand I am spirit and I am spirit soul.
And such transcendentalists still they don't have knowledge of Krishna because they are not yet devotees.
Unless somebody is devotee, has love for Krishna, Krishna personally will not come and meet because you do not have desire.
Only those people who desire to serve Krishna, to engage with Krishna, Krishna shows his form.
So these people,
So their aim is to enjoy Brahma Sukh. Brahma Sukh means they understand that repeated birth and death is very miserable.
They understand I am eternal. I have taken so much of trouble here, suffering so much death.
So they want to just merge in Brahma Jyoti, light which is coming out of body of Krishna.
So some people they see the supreme Brahma Jyoti as the aim of life.
And they don't understand that Krishna is the source of the Brahma Jyoti.
And there is another set of people. People, different people are mentioned and all these people are having high consciousness.
Whether the people who are elevated and they are able to understand that I am not the body, they want to merge in Brahma Jyoti.
And there is a very advanced stage. These people are able to understand that God has got a form and thus they want to serve God.
That is their success of life. I just want to remain serving Krishna.
They are much much higher than the people who think that this Krishna is, oh what is this, these activities which are described here.
Shouting in the jungle and imitating the animals, jumping, fighting and all these things.
These ordinary boys also do. What is special in all these activities?
Similarly when a person reads Ras Leela. So same thing I am seeing in Hollywood and Bollywood, a man dancing with a woman.
So what is this special in Ras Leela? This is the difference.
There is a gulf of difference between spirit and matter.
Although externally it appears just like in the last class somebody asked a question that why Arjuna, he fought for land.
Arjuna did not fight for land.
Arjuna's fighting appears like any other king's fighting for land and property.
But Arjuna was not fighting for land.
The Hare Krishna Maha Mantra appears like any other sound.
So some people ask can I chant the name of any other Devata?
All the Devatas we see they are part of material world.
Can I not chant 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 some other sound?
So this is the difference in understanding.
So to us who are having just mundane vision, everything appears to be mundane.
Just like a person who is sick, all the food appears bitter to that person.
So now in our sixth stage, when we cannot even understand I am not the body, just like a child cannot understand its origin,
he should not waste time in speculation and get knowledge from the elderly people, wise people or from the books.
In a similar fashion, we should get knowledge from the Vedas.
And when we are advanced, all the knowledge will be revealed in the heart automatically, all the Vedic knowledge.
So thus understanding our limited position, we should not try to think this is material, this is spiritual.
Everything will appear material to us because our body is designed in such a manner.
So thus we should take guidance of the spiritual master, just like a child understands from the parents reality of this world and from the Vedas, Vedic knowledge.
So thus this Vedic knowledge, it explains, please do not mistake the holy name of Krishna to be like ordinary sound,
the deity in the temple like a stone, spiritual master like an ordinary human being.
No, it is not a fact like that.
Similarly, Krishna's activities of playing with children,
those who are taken shelter of Maya or illusory energy,
then they think Krishna is an ordinary man.
And that is why all the Krishna's activities are explained at 10th canto.
A person will become God realized by reaching by the time he reaches 10th canto, if he follows all the rules and regulations very systematically.
So in 10th canto, these activities are being mentioned.
So a person should understand Shukadeva Goswami was so advanced sage that as soon as he took birth,
he was not first of all coming out in this world because he was knowing if I come out in this world, you will engage me in all these activities.
Material energy is very strong. It will capture me.
I will not come out from the womb.
And he was such a powerful stage. He did not allow his body to expand.
So 16 years he was able to contain himself in the womb of mother.
Then on Krishna's assurance, Ved Vyasa's assurance, he was taught Bhagavatam while in the womb of the mother.
And then after understanding Bhagavatam, he came out.
One who understands Bhagavatam, he cannot be contaminated by material energy.
But because he was realized as soon as he came out, he walked out of his house, no attachment for anything.
And same Shukadeva Goswami, who has no attachment, no attraction, no interest in the material affairs,
he is describing how these boys are jumping upon Krishna in the jungle and eating and sharing each other's food,
stealing each other's lunches, tossing it on to another boy.
So all these activities, why he is describing, he is not interested in childish activities.
Man and woman, the sages, sadhus, they understand this is the binding knot which creates all the complications here, basis of our illusion.
So why is describing Krishna's dancing with the gopis?
So these are not ordinary pastimes.
So these mundane affairs which we see in Hollywood, Bollywood, increase our lust.
But this pastimes of Ras Leela, if read, heard systematically, going through all the cantos under guidance of spiritual master,
it removes even a tiny pinch of lust from the heart.
It completely removes all the lust from the body.
This is the effect of Ras Leela.
The same sound is binding here in the material world and the same sound is a cause of liberation.
Same attachment to materialists creates complications and suffering in the life.
Same attachment to devotees who also appear like ordinary human beings.
It opens the door to liberation.
So please never see.
Once disciple asked Prabhupada, so Prabhupada, we are seeing God brothers and God sisters in dream.
So is that also illusion? Are we under tamoguna?
When we are sleeping, we are tamasik. Prabhupada told, no, we are not in tamoguna.
If you are able to see Krishna or the devotees in dream, that means in dream also you are in sattva guna.
You are advancing in spiritual life.
So thus we should not mistake Hare Krishna mantra to be an ordinary mantra,
these words to be an ordinary words and simply by, so last line is also very important.
So there is one category of people who are maya, sritana, low consciousness.
They think Krishna is a man.
Higher consciousness, they understand that Krishna, they take Krishna as simply an effulgence
and higher consciousness than that, they understand Krishna as a person, they want to serve Krishna.
But all these people, even who have realized Vishnu form,
even those who know that I have to serve Krishna in this form,
in this Vishnu form, who is the source of all the manifestations,
they also cannot understand.
These activities they also have no access to.
These activities of intimate relationship with Krishna is revealed to very advanced personalities
who don't worship Krishna because he is God,
who want to just serve Krishna because they just want to do it.
They develop a spontaneous attraction.
I am so much attracted by this personality, I just want to serve.
So Krishna tells, my worship which is done in knowledge of my opulences does not satisfy me
because when a devotee understands this is God before me,
there is all irreverence in relationship.
But Krishna wants intimacy.
You don't worship me because I am God.
You worship spontaneously.
So this is the platform on which we have to reach.
And those devotees who reach this platform, they are offered this position.
And Krishna consciousness offers such a position to all the aspirants
who want to attain such a state of spiritual life.
And such living entities are able to understand.
So this universal form is not very important.
Thus Srila Prabhupada has spoken, rather devotees don't want to see this.
Arjuna requested just for safeguarding the false incarnations,
safeguarding devotees from false incarnations.
So thus Prabhupada has spoken on all the chapters of Bhagavad Gita,
but Prabhupada has not given a single lecture on this 11th chapter of Bhagavad Gita,
the universal form.
Because just like Yasodhama, when she saw universal form,
and sometimes she would realize that Krishna is the supreme personality of Godhead,
so Krishna did not like it. Krishna would expand his yogamaya,
and Yasodha will forget.
And again Yasodha will start taking care of Krishna,
again start worrying about him,
and take him in lap, feed him and all these things.
This is what Krishna likes.
So thus this universal form is not very important,
and thus devotees are not interested in this external manifestation of opulences of Krishna.
Devotees are interested in the personal form of Krishna.
And that is what we see now in the next class.
Krishna will declare this is the original, the most confidential form.
How it is confidential? How do we understand universal form is coming from Krishna?
How do we understand that Vishnu is coming from Krishna and not vice versa?
All these things we will discuss in the next class.
But this verse closes by giving us a great hint,
how to come to this platform. It is so difficult
that I get an opportunity beyond realization that I am spirit soul,
beyond seeing that Krishna is the source of all incarnation.
Such an advanced spiritual life of playing with Krishna,
how can we attain that?
So the scriptures are mentioning.
Many many lifetimes of punya accumulation a person has to do.
A unique kind of punya, devotional punya a person has to do,
devotional activities.
After many many lifetimes of tapasya,
tapasya is very important, austerities,
following rules and regulations of spiritual life,
person comes to this platform.
And the same punya Shrimad Bhagavatam tells,
it is attained by
Simply by chanting and hearing,
the same punya is built.
So in order to have God realization,
we should not become very disturbed that I am not having immediately.
I should be anxious for it,
but have patience also.
Unless my consciousness is elevated just like a child,
I cannot immediately understand.
So to elevate consciousness, I have to have punya.
And how do I have punya?
It is told, simply keep on hearing.
We are not understanding, does not matter.
With our commitment, every morning and evening,
keep on hearing Bhagavatam, Bhagavad Gita regularly with determination.
This small tapasya, simply by hearing, hearing, hearing, hearing,
hearing,
hearing and chanting is just punya.
When punya is sufficiently accumulated,
we will understand everything about God automatically, effortlessly.
So it is very simple process.
Throughout the day, keep on chanting, hearing, chanting, hearing,
maximize your hearing throughout the day.
Hearing, hearing, hearing, hearing, chanting, chanting,
we are building punya.
When this punya reaches certain level,
then automatically we understand about God.
And if we follow all the rules and regulations very nicely,
then there is a quality to this chanting and hearing and punya
builds up at a very fast rate.
So does this hearing is the crux of everything,
all this realization of universal form and beyond.
So please do not neglect with a strong vow determination.
Someday you have to go hungry, go hungry.
You have to have loss in office, loss in business.
Have that loss.
Ultimately, we're going to die.
All loss will happen, but don't lose this human form of life.
Whatever may happen, your vow, you should not deviate from this lecture.
This lecture, this much time, these many times,
Hare Krishna Maha Mantra, I should chant here every day.
Never reduce it, please.
And you follow with tapasya continuously and then you see the changes.
